POPULIST HERITAGE POLITICS AND THE POWERFUL IRRELEVANCE OF ARCHAEOLOGY
Author(s): Niklasson, Elisabeth (Stanford University)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the grand scheme of things, archaeology is politically trivial. We can bemoan misappropriations of narratives and sites at
conference after conference, but archaeology will probably never be high on any political party’s or governments agenda. We
can initiate hundreds of inclusive community projects, but archaeology is never going to shift the tides of political opinion. It is
dangerous to admit this. As funding for culture and the humanities is waning and advocates scramble to motivate the relevance
of archaeology – either by jumping on the scientistic bandwagon, by couching it in the cultural industry frame, or by stressing
its positive emotive and edifying effects in times of crisis – recognizing the irrelevance of archaeology is like adding insult to
injury. Still, this is where we must start if we seek to position archaeology in the political: because it is in its irrelevance the
power lies. In this talk I explore how the triviality of archaeology can make it useful as a condition for the mobilization of heritage
in nationalist-populist politics. Using examples from parliament proceedings and proposals by populist-nationalist parties in Europe, I suggest that by endorsing archaeology as a good-will project and as representing the “right” kind of heritage, parties can
reinforce their arguments about European societies being caught in a ‘cultural struggle’, and fuel what Arjun Appadurai has called
‘predatory identities’. When used as a building block of cultural policy, this irrelevance can become a gateway to power. Since
cultural policy is often less guarded by establishment parties than other policy fields, it can be a roundabout way to reach real
targets like immigration policy. Finally, I address the tacit compliance of archaeologists and heritage professionals in situations
when the political message is right (more money for archaeology!) but the sender is wrong.
