THE OSCILLATING RELEVANCE OF LA TÈNE IN BRITISH IRON AGE CHRONOLOGY
Author(s): Adams, Sophia (University of Glasgow)
Presentation Format: Oral
La Tène: a chronology that lives beyond the site, beyond regional and national boundaries; a term that conjures images of swirling
ambiguous imagery, fine metalwork and shining pots. In Britain the term describes artefacts of apparently comparative date, in
particular brooches. La Tène I brooches have strong affinities with examples from the type site and on the near continent. In contrast the La Tène II style brooches are often exceedingly different from their apparently contemporary counterparts in France,
Belgium, Germany and Switzerland. Yet the proposed stylistic connections between these regions have been used to create the
chronology of these artefacts in Britain; organised into period boundaries, bracketed by calendar years. In turn these stylistically
dated brooches have been used as evidence to date features and sites.
It is only in recent years that radiocarbon dates have been obtained for human and animal remains found with the brooches,
but these are often considered as subsidiary evidence owing to the limitations in the calibration curve. At SUERC, University of
Glasgow, Dr Derek Hamilton and I are redressing this situation to explore brooch chronology starting from the radiocarbon dates.
We are undertaking a large-scale programme of sampling articulated burials and animal remains that have been deposited in the
same archaeological context as Iron Age brooches. These dates will provide an independent chronology that may transcend
geographical, temporal and culture-historical boundaries. Data which we can compare back to the data from Continental Europe.
The margins informing the origins perhaps? This paper discusses the implications of our research on existing chronological sequences. It examines the issues of using La Tène typologies in creating the basis of Bayesian models. With La Tène providing
the platform, the brooches providing the structure and the radiocarbon dates the foundation, can we revise our regional Iron Age
chronologies?
