THE CITY OF THE KAZAN KHANATE AS AN EXAMPLE OF INTERACTION BETWEEN ISLAMIC AND
CHRISTIAN CULTURES
Author(s): Valiulina, Svetlana (Kazan Federal University)
Presentation Format: Poster
In recent years, the expedition of the Kazan University discovered and is actively investigating (head S.Valiulina) the unique monument in the central part of western Kama Region - previously unknown town of the 15th c. The town Toretsky differs by its
originality and richness of material culture, the scale of international trade highly developed craft, multiethnic and multi-religious
population. The collection of artifacts obtained as a result of the excavations is mainly made up of products from local workshops
that worked using patterns and traditions of Islamic culture of the late Middle Ages. Artistic metal tableware, a copper incense
burner, women’s jewelry and belt sets, cast iron boilers are particularly expressive in this regard.
In this sity of the Kazan Khanate, the presence of not only Muslims, but also of a population professing Christianity is indicated by
finds of cultic objects (a small icon and crosses , the cross - encolpion), Russian everyday and glazed ceramics and by pork bones
in archaeozoological materials. The location of Russian dwellings in the center of the town, the presence of expensive status
materials in these houses, show that people living in those houses were not slaves.
Cultural interaction is observed in the nomenclature and forms of household products, in “hybrid” samples of earthen vessels,
oriental in their function and form, and Russian in terms of the composition of clay dough and decor. But it is especially important
that the most numerous group of ceramics in the town (more than 40%) are pot-shaped dishes of red-burning clay, with an admixture of fine sand without polishing and engobe. Such dishes dominate in the 15th century in Russian cities, including Moscow
and Nizhny Novgorod. In the Kazan Khanate, besides Toretsky, it is well known in the Khan layer of Kazan and in some other towns.
