AS WHITE AS SNOW, AS RED AS BLOOD. MOMENTS OF MEMORY AND BELONGING: A SPECIAL CHILD
BURIAL FROM NEOLITHIC BA‘JA
Author(s): Benz, Marion (University of Berlin; University of Bern) - Gresky, Julia (German Archaeological Institute, Berlin) - Alarashi, Hala (Université Côte d’Azur, CEPAM, Nice)
Presentation Format: Oral
In 2018, an extraordinary child burial was discovered in a deep trench of the late Pre-Pottery Neolithic site of Ba‘ ja, in southern
Jordan. Preliminary anthropological analyses have shown that an about 8 ± 2 yrs old girl was buried in this tomb. The burial is
outstanding in several respects, not at least because of a necklace made of more than 2500 beads and a mother-of-pearl ring
which served as a spacer of the chains. In our contribution, we will present some of the special objects, the burial ritual and the
tomb construction in comparison to the other collective burials of the site but also to other child burials in the region. Our investigations show that the display of this infant in the cist grave abided – despite its elaborate grave construction and the complex
necklace – to local traditions. By the meticulously choreographed burial ritual and the repetitive use of red and white materials
and pigment for the grave construction as well as for the body and the jewellery, the burying community confirmed social belongings. The red-white necklace was interspaced only by a few turquoise and hematite beads. The exotic materials should probably
symbolize the participation in regional networks. The deliberate, noisy destruction of thin white sandstone slabs for the grave
cover must have created highly arousing moments of memory. Use-wear analyses will clarify whether the beads had been used
for a long time or whether they had been made for the child. The meaning of the hermetic sealing of the grave might have had
various different reasons. Ongoing anthropological analyses might show whether the special prestige and/or status of the child
might have been due to special personal traits or to familial relationships with other individuals buried in the same area of the site.
