MORS ACERBA INTO THE CIVITAS OF FORUM IULII (NARBONNENSIS GAUL): FROM ARCHAEOTHANATOLOGY TO SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY
Author(s): Lattard, Alexia (Centre Camille Jullian CCJ, Aix-en-Provence; Laboratoire d’Anthropologie bioculturelle - ADES, Marseille) - Schmitt, Aurore (Laboratoire d’Anthropologie bioculturelle - ADES, Marseille)
Presentation Format: Oral
This study presents a synthesis of the funeral practices for immature individuals during the High Empire. The originality lies in the
choice of a micro-regional approach, here an administrative and legal territory well defined in Antiquity: the civitas of Forum Iulii
(Fréjus, Provence, France). In the main city (Forum Iulii) or secondary town (Forum Voconii) of this territory, the funeral spaces,
excavated between 1980 and 2008, provide a corpus of 103 exhumed tombs dated between the end of the first century BC and
the beginning of the 4th century AD.
The aim is to understand the funeral structures dedicated to immature individuals, through the different contexts which are associated with these burials. Thus, we question, through funeral practices, the perception and place of the death of these immature individuals in Roman societies. Indeed, the funeral practices specific to these young subjects are the result of choices made
in the family intimacy; they place the deceased in a new context, the otherness of death reminding society of the deceased’s
place in the realm of childhood.
The graves analysed, comprising cremations or inhumations, testify to specific gestures towards them; the inter-site comparative analysis reveals heterogeneity in the practices. Despite the sharing of a common standard in the constitution of the tomb
throughout this territory, the archaeological data and the renewal of problematics associated with methodological progress in
Archaeothanatology, allows us to interpret this variability better. This diversity of situations, both in deposits and devices, highlights specific treatments depending on the social group to which they are linked. This new reading proposes the first answers
on the origin and the identification of the populations present on the territory of this civitas.
