CHILDREN OF THE DUST JUVENILE CREMATION BURIALS IN THE LBA CEMETERY OF ZAGYVAPÁLFALVA, NORTH-EAST HUNGARY
Author(s): Guba, Szilvia (Ferenc Kubinyi Museum) - Köhler, Kitti (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Archaeological Institute)
Presentation Format: Oral
The LBA cremation cemetery of Zagyvapálfalva has been known for more than 150 years. The first excavations were conducted
in 1920-s revealing ca 250 graves. During our research in 2007-2008 another 815 cremation graves were recorded, with 846
cremated individuals. The cemetery was believed for decades to be dated to the Piliny (Reinecke Bz B2 to Bz D) and Kyjatice cultures (Ha A-B). New investigations reveal a beginning already in the MBA (Reinecke Bz A3) and a smooth transition into the Late
Bronze Age. Altogether 262 child burials were identified and with only one exception - all were cremated. Most of the children
were buried in separate graves, but we could also document multiply burials (adults with child or child with child). Almost 75% of
juveniles could be classified to the age groups of Infans I. and II. and Juvenis, while in 9% of all children graves were neonates. In
3 burials foetus were registered: two of them were buried together with an adult female.
Within the cemetery, a large variation of grave structures was recognised: stone coverings of graves, stone and earth structures,
like tumuli. Also, placing the cremations, bronze artefacts, animal remains and other grave goods into the graves and vessels,
create a complex puzzle to solve. Nevertheless, the burial rite as such is strict and follows specific rules, which were adapted
even for children. In some cases though, slight differences could be noticed during the burial of juveniles.
In our presentation we would like to highlight some of the results of our investigations regarding grave type, grave accessories,
urn type with the connection of the possible age of the buried child. The results are set into chronological framework and gives
us the opportunity to examine changes in child burials, body treatments and child death during centuries.
