FUTURE OF MUSEUM ARCHAEOLOGY: EXCEPTIONAL, UNIVERSAL OR MONOLITHIC FUTURES?
Author(s): Cvjeticanin, Tatjana (National Museum in Belgrade)
Presentation Format: Oral
Thinking about heritage futures among archaeologist considers museums mainly as repositories and institutions for preservation, listed under the umbrella of heritage or museum management. And yet, musealization (and consequently disposal of
objects) or conservation are not the only activities to reflect upon.
Future of museums is currently intensely discussed and future museums are commonly seen as institutions that will “empower
people to question different issues”, increasing diversity while “curating experiences” that interconnect communities/society
(cf. https://museum-id.com/the-futuremuseum-project-what-will-museums-be-like-in-the-future-essay-collection/). The underlying values are cultural diversity and multiple identities, shaping museums as safe spaces for dialogue, forced to change
their voice of authority.
How that reflects on the archaeology in museums, particularly archaeological exhibitions?
The examples of several Balkan museums promise univocal, monolithic futures, presenting either political negotiations of identity (Serbia, North Macedonia) or firm and lasting national traits that are not negotiable (Bulgaria, Hungary). Museum professionals here are attuning delicately, intentionally or unintentionally, to the voice of only one stakeholder. Times of transition and
uncertainty are ‘softened’ by reinvented glorified national (mnemo)history. The future here seems isolated, bleak. On the other
side of the spectrum are the “universal” museums, creating an impressive past for privileged visitors, promising the stability of
traditional values of excellence and progress and counteracting the present insecurities.
These examples secure heritage (for the) future only for uniqueness, originality, preciousness and petrify commonly accepted
values and prejudices. Preserving those selected pasts might maintain a short-time relevance of those models. On the other
hand, since museum professionals in general anticipate the future of their institutions still charged with inequality, centrism(s),
political influences and market forces, the path to truly relevant museum archaeology in the future entails taking an ethical and
pro-active position.
