BLADE TECHNOLOGY OF THE D-A LAYERS FROM SIBUDU, SOUTH AFRICA, WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF
MIS 5 IN SOUTHERN AFRICA
Author(s): Schmid, Viola (Department of Early Prehistory and Quaternary Ecology, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen; UMR
7041, Equipe AnTET, Université Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense)
Presentation Format: Oral
Stone Age research has for a long time neglected the Middle Stone Age (MSA) of MIS 5 due to the scarcity of well-dated and
well-documented sites and the focus on the purportedly exceptionally innovative Still Bay and Howiesons Poort techno-complexes. However in recent years, a shift becomes noticeable, as more and more archaeological data are acquired illustrating the
uniqueness and inventiveness of the MSA during MIS 5. One striking adoption as an integral component within the toolkits of this
time period stands out, namely blade technology, though the mechanisms behind the appearance of this phenomenon remain
so far poorly understood. Current excavations at Sibudu Cave in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, by the University of Tübingen have
yielded MIS 5 lithic assemblages that contribute to the discussion about the significance and diversity of laminar reduction
strategies during the MSA.
Following the chaîne opératoire approach, this paper presents a technological analysis of the lithic artefacts from layers D-A of
the Deep Sounding at Sibudu. The knappers during this phase of occupation exploited a range of different raw materials to manufacture a variety of bifacial and unifacial points, including serrated pieces. Here I explain how the inhabitants of Sibudu focused
on the production of laminar elements and developed a particular reduction strategy to obtain blades and elongated flakes.
These strata are characterized by unidirectionally knapped cores with a lateral crest opposite a wider, flat surface referred to as
méplat or lateral plane that produces a triangular asymmetric volume for exploitation. The configuration of the cores facilitates
the manufacture of laminar products with different intended morphological features. These results highlight the distinctive
character of the laminar reduction system of the D-A layers of Sibudu and foster the discussion on the implications of this technological choice within the context of the southern African MSA.
