COMMUNITY ARCHAEOLOGY IN ZUOYING OLD CITY SITE, TAIWAN
Author(s): Wang, Bo-Chiao - Liu, Yi-Chang - Chung, Kuo-Feng (National Cheng Kung University, Institute of Archaeology)
Presentation Format: Poster
Zuoying old city site located in southern Taiwan. It contains materials from almost every period in Taiwan history, from Neolithic
to modern days. The settlement surrounding the site also has residents with different backgrounds and identities.
In 2016, National Cheng Kung University (NCKU) archaeological team started a series of community-based archaeological programs. It is the first community archaeology attempt in Taiwan, and even though there are experimented archaeologists in the
team, they are doing something that has never been done before. Nowadays, the archaeological fieldworks in Taiwan increasingly
tend to be conducted as salvage archaeology. It does so because rescue archaeology provides most of the budget. In reaction
to that, the archaeologists in NCKU are now aware of the necessity of defining other values for Taiwan archaeology than economic ones, to truly benefit modern Taiwan communities. However, since it is a new approach in Taiwan, community-archaeology
program has proved to be quite challenging: archaeologists are facing a much more anthropology-like methodology they are not
familiar with, and increasing spending (both in money and in time) compare to a standard salvage archaeological program.
Is community-based archaeology approach a way to bring new value to modern archaeology? What is the strategy we need when
facing local communities with divergent interests? What could we do when local authority (also the sponsor of the program in
this case) are making extra and unrealistic demands? Should we persist or make compromises when community archaeology
appears to be too costly?
This research not only aims to present both the complexity of the site and of the community around it, but it also intends to reflect the ideas lying behind this archaeological program., by presenting the conflicts and the endeavors in archaeological works,
and what do we think the community-based archaeology can bring to modern Taiwan.
