ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE AND LANDSCAPE EVOLUTION IN ROMAN AND EARLY MEDIEVAL LISBON
INFERRED FROM PALYNOLOGICAL AND SEDIMENTOLOGICAL ANALYSES
Author(s): Currás, Andrés (Instituge of Heritage Sciences, CSIC. Santiago de Compostela) - Costa, Ana Maria (Laboratório de
Arqueociências - LARC/Direção-Geral do Património Cultural - DGPC - and EnvArch / CIBIO / InBIO, Lisboa; Instituto Dom Luiz IDL, Universidade de Lisboa) - Freitas, Maria da Conceição (Instituto Dom Luiz - IDL, Universidade de Lisboa) - Bugalhão, Jacinta
(Direção-Geral do Património Cultural - DGPC; Centro de Arqueologia - UNIARQ, Universidade de Lisboa) - Lopes, Vera (Instituto
Dom Luiz - IDL, Universidade de Lisboa) - Danielsen, Randi (-)
Presentation Format: Oral
Landscape evolution and environmental change in Lisbon have been addressed by the use of multi-proxy analysis, including
pollen, non-pollen-palynomorphs and sedimentological data preserved in a sedimentary core retrieved in a sub-tidal area of the
northern Tagus margin.
Four radiocarbon dates indicate that the record covers from 1st century cal AD to late 6th century cal AD. Data cross-check
with available archaeological information of the city enables for the reconstruction of palaeoenvironmental dynamics during
circa 600 yr period at high resolution. Main results evidence that the area of Lisbon was an open landscape with little woodlands
and high human impact at least since the 1st century cal AD. A higher influence of human activity has been identified in early
3rd century cal AD. A change in the sedimentary record has been identified in early 3rd century cal AD that can be related with
natural events or higher human activity. A marked sedimentological change occurred in early 4th century AD, coincident with the
late Roman period, and suggesting a change in the behaviour of the Tagus tributaries. A new phase of increase human impact has
been identified in late 5th century cal AD.
The diverse rhythms of environmental change occurred in accordance with social and political evolution of the area and evidence
the usefulness of transdisciplinary and multi-proxy approach in landscape archaeology studies.
