HOW TO SCAN A MAMMOTH. RECORDING, ANALYZING AND PRESENTING CT SCANNED 3D DATA OF A
LATEGLACIAL PROBOSCIDEAN FROM ROTKREUZ, SWITZERLAND
Author(s): Reinhard, Jochen - Huber, Renata (Amt für Denkmalpflege und Archäologie)
Presentation Format: Poster
In 2015, a tusk and several bones of the postcranial skeleton of a woolly mammoth (Mammuthus primigenius) have been found
during construction work in Risch-Rotkreuz (Canton Zug, Switzerland). Dating to around 15’000 B. C., the capital bull is one of the
latest known mammoth finds from the Swiss plateau shortly before the species went extinct regionally. Though fragmented, the
impressive size of the tusk and the nearly perfect condition of the bone substance demanded a scientific and museum presentation from early on. To make them available to both researchers and the wider public alike, all finds were subjected to computer
tomography scans. The bones could be fitted into a clinical CT scanner at the local hospital (Siemens Somatom Definition AS)
with good results. Subsequently, image segmentation was performed on the standardized DICOM image stacks using the open
source software ‘3DSlicer’ to export 3D models. The sheer size of the tusk made clinical CT impossible – it was scanned with
an industrial CT scanner by Qualitech AG, Mägenwil. Even here, four scans were necessary to record the whole specimen. The
resulting data is of significantly higher resolution compared to the clinical scans, but lower and changing contrast as well as
scanning artefacts resulted in difficulties for image segmentation and the analysis of the tusk’s inner structure. Albeit this, the
CT data allow the assessment of the ivory’s banding of varying density commonly interpreted as incremental (annual?) growth of
the tusk. Through the hosting platform ‘Sketchfab’ all 3D data is, in slightly reduced complexity, made publicly available to view,
interact with and download for everyone. QR codes interlink the web presentation with conventional publication and museum
exhibition. In addition, the 3D models and printed copies of the mammoth finds are used as educational material at the local
Museum für Urgeschichte(n) in Zug.
