OSTEOBIOGRAPHY AND DIGITAL MICROSCOPY. APPROACHING MANIPULATED HUMAN REMAINS
Author(s): Gramsch, Alexander (RGK - Romano-Germanic Commission DAI) - Grosskopf, Birgit (Historische Anthropologie, Universität Göttingen)
Presentation Format: Oral
The increase in technology-based approaches to the study of human remains solidified the perception of the human body as a
repository of a wide array of data. Human remains are considered as a ‘bio-archive’ yielding information on age and sex, nutrition
and health status, ancestry and individual or group mobility etc., leading to narratives of e.g. social inequality or migration. As
the session organisers point out, numerous new digital approaches to skeletal remains increase the scope of bioarchaeological
information, but at the same time methods and data and the resulting interpretations require critical discussion.
Recent years simultaneously witnessed the rising differentiation of interpretive approaches to the human body and both its material and sociocultural aspects. Bioarchaeology and thanatoarchaeology develop an understanding of the body as embodying
strategies of coping with disease and death, and of the necessity to reconstruct individual biographies – osteobiography as a
‘material history’ written on the bones of individuals.
We are trying to merge both attitudes in an interdisciplinary small-scale project combining the approaches of osteobiography
and thanatoarchaeology with the osteology/anthropology of human remains based upon digital data. In this project based at the
Romano-Germanic Commission, Frankfurt a.M., in cooperation with the department of Historical Anthropology, Göttingen University, we are currently investigating human bones bearing traces of post-mortem manipulations, recovered from the Neolithic
settlement site of Herxheim (Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany). The bones are examined using a digital microscope and applying
digital photographic images at various resolutions, cross-sections, and 3D-modelling.
Using a praxeological concept we evaluate these data as traces of post-mortem practices manipulating the individual human
body (and parts thereof). We suggest approaching the material history of the human body as an ‘itinerary’, describing how the
body acted and was acted upon – both during the person’s lifetime and following biological death, i.e. including post-mortem
practices.
