“WEST VS. EAST”. THE INTERPRETATION OF CULTURE MATERIALS IN THE ROMAN EASTERN
PROVINCES ARCHAEOLOGY
Author(s): Ahmad, Tarek (Institute of Classical Archaeology, Free University Berlin)
Presentation Format: Oral
In recent years, many studies have been focusing on the interrelationship between cultures within the Roman archaeology from
“the West vs. East” perspective. The archaeological studies of the ancient Near Eastern, especially during the Roman period,
have mostly applied historical and archaeological methods in their interpretation of culture materials, which are essentially based
on the attempt to distinguish between local / indigenous / native (mostly Hellenized) and colonial (Roman) cultures contextualizing the reciprocal cultural influences (e.g. Aliquot 2009; Ball 1999). These methods have led to concepts like Hellenization and
Romanization, in which cultural production has been viewed through the lens of Roman colonialism and cultural superiority. On
the other hand, the interrelationship between “Roman” and “local” cultures is sometimes presented as a “West vs. East” cultural
conflict. In my opinion, such concepts mislead our attempt to investigate the mechanism of the absorption of the Eastern geographical areas and their cultures within the Roman Empire. Furthermore, they back historical arguments around contemporary
political manipulation, in which Roman culture represents the “West” and the local indicates the “East”.
Although some researchers have investigated the impact of Roman Imperialism on the cultural environment in Roman “Near East”
via different perspectives (Andrade 2013; Newson 2015; Sommer 2005), concepts like Hellenization and Romanization - as representatives of “Western Culture” - still dominate. This proposal paper aims to criticize this traditional disciplinary main-streaming of the Classical Archaeology (Roman-Provinces), and tries to propose the application of other social concepts, including
the hybridity and the ethnicity, which are developed in the 20th century postcolonial theory (Bhabha 1994; Jones 1997; Young
1995), as alternative methods to investigate the mechanisms of Roman imperialism in Eastern provinces.
