ACCESS TO THE WORLD HERITAGE SITES IN ROMANIA. A CASE OF DACIAN FORTRESSES
Author(s): Musteata, Sergiu (Institute of Archaeology, Romanian Academy, Iasi branch)
Presentation Format: Oral
Romania is among the 193 states that signed the World Heritage Convention since 1990 when has become part of one of the
most important international treaties. Romania has inscribed eight sites: Danube Delta (1991, natural site), Moldavian Churches (1993), Horezu Monastery (1993), Villages with Fortified Churches in Transylvania, Fortresses from the Orăştie Mountains
(1999), the Sighisoara Historic Center (1999), the Maramureş Wooden Churches (1999) and the Ancient and Primary Beech
Forests of the Carpathians and other regions of Europe (2017). In 2018 Romania had a great opportunity to register a Roşia Montană Mining Landscape site, but the Government decided to suspend the registration process that was already in its final phase.
However, the real implementation of the Convention began in 2000, when the first legal instrument was approved by the Government regarding the establishment of measures for the protection of historical monuments belonging to the World Heritage List.
Between 2000 and 2011 other normative acts were adopted, but until now the normative situation requires better development.
Unfortunately, until today just two World Heritage Sites have the management plans (Danube Delta and Horezu Monastery) and
the state of conservation is an actual topic for all of them.
The World Heritage Sites are attractive from many points of views and the access to the sites is an important issue. My presentation will be focused on the Fortresses from the Orăştie Mountains, which includes six Ancient sites. Because they are placed
on an original landscape, the access to some sites is very difficult. But, the access to the sites should be discussed from large
perspective, which include general information of each site, the ways of access, stops, parking, and other facilities. So, in my
presentation, I will discuss the relation between general information of the sites and access to each of them.
