NATIONALISM, IDENTITY POLITICS AND THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF EUROPE − A NEW INTRODUCTION TO AN OLD PROBLEM
Author(s): Hofmann, Daniela (University of Bergen) - Frieman, Catherine (School of Archaeology and Anthropology, Australian National University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeologists have long been aware that their field, like any discipline, is far from politically neutral, but most European archaeologists have not had to grapple with the politics of the field for the last several decades. Instead, the politicisation of
archaeological practice was most particularly felt only in certain subsections of the discipline, for instance when working with
descendant communities or in outreach. This situation is radically changing. The political agendas of national governments are
leading to job losses and the dismantling of organisations and institutions whose research is not in line with the prevailing ideology. Research into genetic histories has reopened ugly debates about essentialised identities. Archaeological data are being operationalised by political actors in ways we archaeologists have little control over. Moreover, all of this is happening in a context
in which our research is being much more widely reported on and discussed in a range of media, and not always in ways with which
we are comfortable. This can even lead to personal attacks against researchers who speak out.
As this is unlikely to change any time soon, it is imperative that we share examples of best practice and reflect on how the field
can best take a concerted stance. We will introduce the session using the example of archaeogenetic research, which –quite
against the wishes of its practitioners – is being widely used to drive an agenda of biologised identity, sold as objective fact,
which is hard to control and potentially highly divisive. We argue that the first step is to critically reflect on our own disciplinary
practices, those of our collaborators, and the structural settings in which research dissemination takes place.
