STONES IN MOUNTAIN SOILS AS INDICATOR FOR ANTHROPOGENIC ACTIVITY (MONTANFON VALLEY,
AUSTRIA)
Author(s): Röpke, Astrid (Ur- und Frühgeschichte, Universität zu Köln) - Klopfer, Rudolph - Krause, Rüdiger (Vor- und Frühgeschichte, Goethe Universität Frankfurt)
Presentation Format: Oral
Bartholomäberg (900 - 2000 m a.s.l., Montafon Valley, Austria) is vertically subdivided into a settlement, a former mining and a
pasture zone. However, the spatial extent of these different land use zones has changed through time as indicated by geoarchaeological, archaeobotanical and archaeological results. In good accordance with all available data the settlement activity and
land use started in the later Early Bronze Age (18/17th cent. BC).
In this study we focus on the origin of stones in soils from the different land use zones. These montaneous to subalpine soils
are comparatively thick reaching up to two meters in foot slope position. Most of them have been modified by human activity
consisting of several colluvial layers. The results of our study indicate a considerably higher skeletal contents in soils of the
settlement zone (900-1300 m a.s.l) than in the pasture zone (1400 -2000 m a.s.l). Comprehensibly, concentrations of stones
are located in the area of prehistoric settlements sites shown as walls, stone plasters, fire places, burnt pits etc, but they are
also frequent in the surroundings evidencing further settlement activity nearby. In contrast, the soils under pastures seem to
be almost stone-free. This distinctly lower skeleton content could derive from more easily weathered parent rock (clay, marl,
mica schists), but again human impact can not been ruled out. This could also be a phenomenon related to pasture cleaning and
maintance. Until the middle of the 20th century so-called „Almputzer“ regularely removed bushes, repaired pathways and picked
up stones to prevent damage of the grass cover. In Bartholomäberg the presence of stone heaps (Steinlesehaufen) might point
to such former cleaning activities in the pasture zone.
