RADIOCARBON DATING OF HUMAN REMAINS FROM THE LATE NEOLITHIC DOLMEN OF OBERBIPP
(SWITZERLAND). CLARIFYING THE CHRONOLOGY AND SEQUENCES OF BURIALS
Author(s): Steuri, Noah (Department of Prehistory, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, University of Bern) - Siebke, Inga
(Department of Physical Anthropology, Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Bern) - Furtwängler, Anja (Institute for
Archaeological Sciences, Archaeo- and Palaeogenetics, University of Tübingen) - Krause, Johannes (Institute for Archaeological Sciences, Archaeo- and Palaeogenetics, University of Tübingen; Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History,
Jena; Senckenberg Centre for Human Evolution and Palaeoenvironment, University of Tübingen) - Szidat, Sönke (Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern; Oeschger Centre for Climate Change Research, University of Bern) - Lösch,
Sandra (Department of Physical Anthropology, Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Bern) - Hafner, Albert (Department
of Prehistory, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, University of Bern; Oeschger Centre for Climate Change Research, University of Bern)
Presentation Format: Oral
Undisturbed collective megalithic burials are extremely rare. The dolmen of Oberbipp provides a unique opportunity for multidisciplinary research. Morphological analysis indicate at least 42 individuals buried in the grave chamber. Using archaeology alone
it was not possible to determine different occupation periods of the inhumations. Neolithic communities often reused dolmen
over centuries, therefore radiocarbon dating might be able to solve this question. Fragments of the same bone element (right
femora) were analyzed by two (in some cases three) different laboratories to date all inhumations individually.
This study had three aims: a) determine the total occupation time of the dolmen; b) evaluate the sequence of the burials; c) compare the results of the same skeletal element from different laboratories.
In total, 79 radiocarbon results from three different laboratories of the right femora (n=32) are available. The broad application
of radiocarbon dating allowed the determination of two occupation periods within the burial: The majority of the femora (n=26)
date between 3350-2950BCE, but three samples are from a younger period (2900-2650BCE). The comparison between radiocarbon dates obtained in different laboratories for the same sample showed little variation and only a few samples differed
substantially.
Our sampling strategy indicates the necessity for archaeological settings such as multiple burials to include large serial radiocarbon measurements to ensure that all occupation phases are uncovered. In addition, our data indicate that dating at different
laboratories should be included in the sampling process to guarantee that the interpretation is based on the best available data.
Even though the overall concordance across the laborites was good, little variation could lead to a different interpretation of a
site. In future it should also be considered to include other bioarchaeological methods such as aDNA analysis in combination with
radiocarbon dating to overcome problems related to plateaus of the calibration curve.
