RELIGIOUS ROMANTICISM: OBSTACLE TO AN UNDERSTANDING OF PREHISTORIC SACRED
TOPOGRAPHIES?
Author(s): Mathieu, Jon (University of Lucerne)
Presentation Format: Oral
In traditional Christian belief systems the natural world did not play a significant role. As a result of its particular history, this
Western religion had an inwards-looking character and emphasized the community of the believers. The worship of natural objects was not only undesirable, but explicitly forbidden. In Latin America, for example, the Spanish staged a massive campaign
for the ‘extermination of idolatry’ (extirpación de la idolatría) in the 17th century. The campaign aimed at widespread indigenous
cults which celebrated mountains and other features of landscape together with people’s ancestors. The cults were considered
pagan, if not diabolical, by the colonial rulers, and had to be crushed.
Since the 18th centuries, however, Christianity changed. Not least under the influence of organized science, religious interest
in the natural world, increased considerably. In several waves, going from physico-theology through to deep ecology in the 20th
century, Western belief developed new environmental attitudes which may be summarized here as ‘religious Romanticism’. In
the Alps this can be shown, for instance, with the mounting of Christian crosses on mountain summits, a habit started around
1800. The movement affected the interpretation of historical roots, as well. While in earlier days the transition from pagandom to
Christiandom had be seen as a cut, interpreters now saw continuities, particularly in relation with natural cults. Thus the Church
was sometimes characterized as a staunch successor of Celtic and other rites. At the same time, officially refuted ‘witches‘,
‘fairies’, and ‘spirits’ gained new prominence as (presumed) expression of true popular credence.
In my paper I would like to take up some of these issues in oder to stimulate the interdisciplinary discussion about prehistoric
‘stairways to heaven’. My examples are mainly taken from the Andes and the Alps since the 17th century.
