TIME AS DESIGNER: CONSIDERING THE LONG-TERM MATERIAL CHANGES OF ANCIENT FIGURINES
Author(s): Murphy, Céline (Heritage Management Organisation)
Presentation Format: Oral
It is infrequent that time, slowly passing over the long term, be considered as an important element in research on ancient figurines. Rather, on the few occasions that time is discussed, it is usually in relation to short term events, occurring primarily during
the figurines’ production. In addressing this imbalance, I therefore here explore the implications that slow passing time may have
had on the consumption of figurines, and especially, how this impacts our understandings of the notion of figurine ‘design’.
Until the advent of the twenty-first century, numerous archaeological studies on ancient figurines built on the assumption that
design was a process which occurred prior to the objects’ material creation. More recently, however, design has begun to be
conceptualised as a less materially-detached, less temporary phenomenon, which continues developing throughout the manufacture of an object, in accordance with how materials respond to the hand. Building on this premise, I here propose that design
can therefore also continue occurring throughout a figurine’s consumption, and even beyond this, after the figurine and user
have ‘parted ways’.
As is the case during an object’s production, materials continuously change during its consumption. A figurine becomes worn,
breaks, is repaired or is left to decay. Aware of such potential changes, figurine producers sometimes rendered their creations
easily breakable for specific uses or, on the contrary, very solid so that they may last longer. Similarly, surfaces were treated with
incisions to ensure durability, while in other cases light washes, intended to be short-lived are applied. The physical changes that
figurines underwent during their consumption and after their final deposition – and therefore over time – can consequently also
be considered as part of the design process. Time modifies, and in doing so, continuously designs and redesigns.
