THE MANAGEMENT OF INLAND WATERS ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE - THE POLISH ACHIEVEMENTS,
FAILURES, CHALLENGES ...
Author(s): Byszewska, Agata (Narodowy Instytut Dziedzictwa / National Heritage Board Of Poland)
Presentation Format: Oral
The issues of protection of the underwater archaeological heritage are usually discussed in the context of monuments located
in marine areas. However the huge scientific potential lies in inland waters. The protection of the underwater heritage depends
on the legal status of the waters. In the case of inland waters, it`s regulated by the national laws.
The underwater cultural heritage due to its specificity and difficult access is a field of interest for quite a small group of scientists. Meanwhile, the underwater relics of ports, bridges, settlements, etc. complement the history resulting from archaeological
research conducted on land. It`s important to accurately identify these resources and provide them with effective protection.
The threats to underwater heritage result from both environmental and human factors - the water pollution, the eutrophication
of lakes, intensive inland waterway transport, dredging of rivers and water reservoirs, water level fluctuations, developing tourism and intensification investments in the coastal zone of lakes, divers activity, water sports, etc. These threats seem to be
more intense in inland waters - the underwater relics are located at a small depth or on the surface of bottom sediments, thus
being more exposed to unfavorable conditions. One of the threats is an illegal prospection. The attractiveness of underwater
sites, based on well-preserved metal artefacts, makes them the subject of growing interest of all kinds of prospectors - not only
seekers penetrating with a metal detector, but also robbers using neodymium magnets.
Recognition and registration of underwater archaeological sites, evaluation scientific and historical value determines ways of
its management. The protection in situ of underwater relics should be associated with limitation of activities in the area of the
archaeological site. The essential for effective protection is education, the involvement of local authorities and the awareness
of the local community.
