PROFESSIONAL VISUAL COMMUNICATION FOR ARCHAEOLOGISTS
Author(s): Lengyel, Dominik (BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg) - Toulouse, Catherine (Lengyel Toulouse Architects)
Presentation Format: Oral
Communication in scientific communities rely on a set of standardized arguments and methods. The predominant method is verbal argumentation and citation, whilst verbal language itself is based on a strong level of abstraction. The term window prompts
a large set of associations. Visual communication allows a further specification of the intended association. With a combined
set of verbal and visual exchange of information, the communication meets the habits of our century. Especially the Internet
demonstrates and depends on the dominance of a combined flow of verbal and particularly visual data. Furthermore, as visual
communication is capable of concentrating verbal explanations into one single image – that is perceptible in a blink of an eye
– the process of information transfer towards two target groups – archaeologist and the greater audience – can enhance substantially. Training communication therefore also consists of a weighting of verbal and visual content. As visual communication
as such has always been part of archaeological communication, the purpose of this examination is to show how training in professional communication should include scientifically reliable visual communication, that is three-dimensional visualisations of
spatial hypotheses. They cannot efficiently be accomplished by site measurement drawings or sketches, both being parts of the
classical curriculum. There is not yet a standard that is able to compete with these traditional methods. A reasonable approach
to standardize literal translations of verbal to visual argumentation could accomplish this.
The presentation illustrates this approach by projects developed by the authors in their University Chair and their architectural
office in cooperation with archaeological research institutions like Cologne Cathedral and its Predecessors (by order of and
exhibited in Cologne Cathedral), The Metropolis of Pergamon (within the DFG Excellence Cluster TOPOI) and The Palatine Palaces
(by order of the German Archaeological Institute, both exhibited in the Pergamon Museum Berlin).
