INTENSIFIED FOCUS ON UNDERWATER ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE NETHERLANDS
Author(s): Speleers, Barbara - Manders, Martijn (Cultural Heritage Agency the Netherlands)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Netherlands is rich in submerged landscapes as well as reclaimed lands containing heritage of various time periods. As a
seafaring nation it left its remnants also outside its borders. Traces of the Netherlands’ rich maritime history can be found all over
the world. They include wrecks of the many ships that belonged to the Dutch East India Company (VOC), the West India Company
(WIC) and Admiralties. The Dutch State regards these shipwrecks as its property.
In the Netherlands, responsibility for the management of the cultural heritage is shared by national, regional and local government. The North Sea is outside the local and regional borders and is managed by central government. Underwater archaeology
and its potential heritage still don’t have the focus of local authorities. Awareness of their role in the heritage management
needs to be created.
Both the North Sea and IJsselmeer will undergo changes to meet the energy agreement and anticipations on climate change.
The production of energy from renewable sources has to increase considerably in the coming years. Large offshore windfarms
have been planned. The knowledge on the archaeological potential of the seabed is limited and needs to increase to meet the
forthcoming spatial intrusions.
The drawbacks of the system in which archaeological research is connected to spatial planning is that natural degradation is
outside any bodies responsibility. Natural erosion is a concern worldwide.
Without management, there is a risk that wrecks will be lost.
The Minister of Education, Culture and Science has acknowledged the need for intensified focus on maritime heritage and underwater archaeology and has yet increased the budget for the management of it. With the programme Maritime Heritage of
the Netherlands and a separate programme Maritime Heritage International we aim for a complete set of measures to protect,
preserve and research our maritime past.
