CONDITIONS OF INFLUENCE: WHAT ENABLES THE SCANDINAVIAN POPULIST RIGHT TO IMPACT
HERITAGE GOVERNANCE?
Author(s): Holleland, Herdis (Norwegian Institute for Cultural Heritage Research - NIKU) - Niklasson, Elisabeth (Stanford University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Since the early 2000s a nationalist wind has swept over Scandinavia, enabling its three major right-wing populist parties – the
Danish Peoples Party, the Progress Party (Norway) and the Sweden Democrats – to gain influence in state matters. This ought to
concern archaeologists and heritage scholars for several reasons. The most obvious is their apparent enthusiasm for heritage,
and the privileged position heritage holds in many of their narrowly conceptualized cultural policies. In this paper we seek to move
beyond the obvious, however, and address a more fundamental question: What political, bureaucratic and societal conditions
need to exist for far-right parties to influence the way heritage is done in liberal democracies?
Using Scandinavia as our case area, we propose three such conditions: 1) A repositioning of the ‘Overton window’, i.e. the window that encompasses the range of ideas tolerated in public discourse at a given time. As the window of normality is extended,
heritage can be activated in the service of exclusionary ideas such as Scandinavian welfare chauvinism. 2) Gaps left by changes
in governance – following New Public Management, mainstreaming of neo-liberal economic policies and measures to reduce
bureaucracies – have enabled a marriage between the rhetoric of democratization and structural decentralization, creating an
opening for populist right influence. 3) The destabilization of the traditional block-politics in the multiparty systems of Scandinavia, and the prevalence of weaker minority governments, have been crucial for creating spaces wherein heritage policies
and budget initiatives can be negotiated. Although some of these conditions are specific to Scandinavia, most can be applied
broadly, making them interesting starting points for comparison and debate.
