IS ARCHAEOLOGY PRACTICAL? AN INTRODUCTION
Author(s): Alves - Ferreira, Joana (CEAACP - University of Coimbra) - Vale, Ana (FCT-Post-Doctoral Researcher; CITCEM - University of Porto) - Barbosa, Helena (FCT Doctoral Researcher; CITCEM - University of Porto) - Lima, Leilane (MAE-USP; University of Sao Paulo)
Presentation Format: Oral
This session was conceived at a critical moment. Due to a global humanitarian crisis, the contemporary political space is defined
by abandonment and by exodus. Thousands of faces are on the run, lost in the uncertainty of uncertain movements: nomads,
migrants, refugees, displaced, abandoned, anonymous. The contemporary political space has been framed as a state of exception, which, on a global scale, defines the places of power through the bio-political marking of the territory. In broad perspective,
politics as a practice of exception stimulates the spread of the crisis in democracy with the erosion of democratic ethics and values as it promotes the rise of conservative and authoritarian policies, the reiteration of racism and of practices of segregation.
This introduction aims to outline the grounds on which the session was conceived as well as to present some of the theoretical
concepts upon which the conditions for its political and ethical possibilities are based. As such, it intends to counter-actualise
the question originally posed by Gordon Childe in 1933, “Is Prehistory Practical?”, which concerned the utility and liability of prehistoric archaeology in everyday life. Thus, when asking Childe’s question we challenge archaeology’s place in contemporaneity
so as to creatively learn how to enunciate the evidence of becoming – ‘what could be’ – as the places where other choices can be
made. We will explore archaeology as a place for practical invention and its potentiality for both affecting and effecting changes
on the discipline.
Finally, in addition to presenting the structure of the session, it will seek to bring together the different perspectives of both the
organisers and of each contributor, defining shared concepts such as resistance and intervention, social justice and equality,
politics and practicality, hoping to promote the debate and dialogue between the different case studies presented in the session.
