ISOTOPIC APPROACHES FOR THE LAND USE AND AGRICULTURE STUDY AT THE WEST VALDAI
(NORTHERN RUSSIA) IN THE MIDDLE AGES
Author(s): Dobrovolskaya, Maria (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences) - Tiunov, Alexey - Savinetsky, Arkady
- Krylovich, Olga - Kuzmicheva, Evgeniya (A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution Russian Academy of Sciences) Svirkina, Natalia - Smirnov, Alexey (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
The study of the forms of land use, agriculture relationship with social and cultural changes in the Middle Ages seems to be very
important and actual, for certain regions especially. West Valdai region is the territory of the divide between the Volga, West
Dvina and the rivers of the North Baltic flow (Pola, Volkhov). This area was covered by dense forest in the Middle Ages according
historical sources. On the other hand, there are numerous archaeological sites that testify active using of this area. This territory
is characterized by glacial moraine landscape. Numerous burial mounds situated on the tops of postglacial hills, on the high banks
of rivers and lakes indicates these elements of the relief as freed from the forest. These and other contradictions prompted us
to investigate the isotopic composition of carbon, nitrogen, and strontium of modern flora and fauna in the context of landscape
patterns. Based on the analysis of 150 plant samples, 57 fish and 113 mammalian samples, it was shown the patterns of carbon
and nitrogen isotopic composition of bone collagen of animals - representatives of the ecosystems “dense forest”, “forest open
spaces”, “river”, “lake “, etc. These data are used as a basis for studying the medieval local ecosystems, the role of agriculture
influence to their transformation. The isotopic composition of carbon, nitrogen and strontium of Medieval inhabitants’ skeletal
tissues of the region allow to discuss the characteristics of Medieval anthropogenic ecosystems and paleodiets. The study
supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research #17-06-00543.
