POWER AND SATISFACTION OF NEEDS IN CENTRES OF POWER
Theme: Interpreting the archaeological record: artefacts, humans and landscapes
Organisers: Theune, Claudia (University of Vienna, Dep. Prehistory and Historical Archaeology) - Atzbach, Rainer (Aarhus University, School of Culture and Society)
Format: Regular session
Profane centres of power (castles, cities and other places of reign) form striking signs in a landscape. Their elements, forms
and functions are often the subject of archaeological and historical investigations concerning the topography of power. The
objects found at these sites however played a subordinate role in terms of their significance in the specific landscape and the
associated network of power. In the first instance this applies to the communication of power, but also for economic aspects
such as the satisfaction of needs. These are subject to diverging social, economic or ecological requirements of varying degree
and intensity. The satisfaction of needs forms the basis for social action. Possible questions that can be discussed during the
session relate to spatial aspects (“where”), which actors are involved (“who?”) and why specific artefacts occur in an environment (“why?”)? Possible contributions can focus on research questions at the micro level (the individual and social groups in the
seat of power) and at the macro level (location, transport, economy, organization, etc.). How is the site of power integrated into
the surrounding area and what influence does the surrounding area exert (keywords: traffic situation, economic and ecological
conditions, range of influence, rank of the ruler)? In addition to the comprehensive analysis of artefacts and object groups, spatial analyses (viewsheds and network analysis), the application of methods from landscape archaeology, architectural analyses
and the comparison to written and image sources are of great interest for this session. We kindly invite you to submit proposals
that introduce these or similar theory-based analyses.
