ARE BURIAL CUSTOMS OF THE EARLY BRONZE AGE MIERZANOWICE CULTURE IN SOUTH-EASTERN
POLAND AN INDICATOR OF THE SOCIAL STRATIFICATION?
Author(s): Jarosz, Pawel (Institute of Archaeology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań) - Szczepanek, Anita (Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Centre for Mountains and Uplands Archaeology, Cracow; Department
of Anatomy, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Cracow) - Włodarczak, Piotr (Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Centre for Mountains and Uplands Archaeology, Cracow)
Presentation Format: Oral
The dawn of Bronze Age is a time of advanced cultural changes including emergence of group of elites and developing the social stratifications. The south-eastern Poland is at the edge of this modifications that are clearly visible in other regions of the
central Europe. Despite of this locations signs of substantial cultural changes could be detected mainly in funeral customs. An
exceptional example of the development of cultural processes is a ceremonial burial place at Stryjówin the Lublin Upland where
two barrows were explored. They are dated to the younger stage of the Early Bronze Age. In the central part under the barrow 1,
four graves were found. East of barrow 1, the remains of barrow 2 were discovered. A telling feature of burials dug under barrows
in Stryjów is the nature of their burial goods, different in several respects from the well-known inventories of Final Neolithic and
those from the older phase of the Early Bronze Age. They lack the basic elements found in graves from previously dated cemeteries, including ceramic vessels. Another characteristic is the significant reduction in the amount of tools – in comparison with
inventories in the 3rd millennium BC. From the four graves we only have one flint tool (perforator). Also, elements of weapons are
less numerous and limited only to flint arrowheads. Rich and varied is, however, the assortment of ornaments, which include pins,
elements of necklaces and earrings. A spectacular find from Stryjów is a small golden plate with a hole used for attaching a copper wire. This special burial place demonstrate that the trend of changes in social organization included areas of south-eastern
Poland far away from the Early Bronze Age cultural centers.
The project is currently realized (NCN 2015/19/B/HS3/02149 and 2016/20/S/HS3/00307). Earlier investigations were financed
by NCN 2012/05/B/HS3/04138.
