MOBILITY OF THE LAST HUNTER-GATHERERS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN IBERIA: STRONTIUM-BASED
APPROACH
Author(s): Peyroteo Stjerna, Rita (Human Evolution, Dep Organismal Biology, Uppsala University; UNIARQ, Centro de Arqueologia da Universidade de Lisboa) - Costa, Ana Maria (LARC, Laboratório de Arqueociências da DGPC; CIBIO/InBIO, Centro de
Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos; IDL, Instituto Dom Luiz, Universidade de Lisboa) - Pokutta, Dalia (Archaeological Research Laboratory University of Stockholm) - Araújo, Ana Cristina (LARC, Laboratório de Arqueociências da
DGPC; CIBIO/InBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos; UNIARQ, Centro de Arqueologia da Universidade de Lisboa)
Presentation Format: Oral
In archaeology it has been commonly accepted that the construction of the first cemeteries in Europe, between c.10000-8000
years ago, is an indicator of increasing sedentism of mobile hunter-gatherer groups, before the adoption of sedentary farming
lifestyles. However, this assumption is not always fully supported by hard data.
In this paper we explore the mobility of the hunter-gatherers buried in the Mesolithic cemeteries of the Tagus, Sado and Mira
valleys, Portugal. These sites aggregate some of the largest and earliest burial grounds known, around 8000 years old, arranged
and maintained by populations with an exclusive hunting, fishing, and foraging lifestyle. Our aim is to investigate behavioural processes in terms of the geographic origin and mobility history of the people buried in these sites, and how it may have depended
on biological sex, age, kinship, and socio-cultural issues. To achieve this goal, we conducted stable isotope analyses of strontium
(87Sr and 86Sr). Strontium isotope ratios reflect the local geology and its specific chemical signature varies accordingly. This
geochemical marker is used in archaeology to trace migration and mobility patterns by examining the 87Sr/86Sr ratio in bones
and teeth, which are passed on to human tissues through drinking water.
We present the results of mapping variations in environmental 87Sr/86Sr (using Thermal Ionisation Mass Spectrometry) in the
regions of influence of the discussed areas, i.e. the local and regional base-line. To correlate age-dependent tissue formation
time with regional geochemical signatures we conducted a pilot study by micro-sampling tooth enamel and measuring 87Sr/86Sr
isotopic ratio (using Laser Ablation ICP-MS) to quantify and characterize the mobility history of each individual.
