SPATIAL ANALYSIS OF OBJECTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MEZHYRICHIAN EPIGRAVETTIAN CULTURE: A
MODEL OF MOBILITY
Author(s): Shydlovskyi, Pavlo (Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv) - Tsvirkun, Ostap (Institute of Archaeology NAS
of Ukraine) - Péan, Stéphane (UMR 7194 HNHP, MNHN/CNRS/UPVD, Muséum national d’histoire naturelle, Paris)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the basin of the Middle Dnieper and its tributaries, a large number of Upper Palaeolithic sites and palaeontological deposits
have been uncovered. The archaeological settlements are attributed to various chrono-cultural facies: Gravettian, Epigravettian, and Final Palaeolithic. A part of Epigravettian vestiges refers to the Mezhyrichian type of industry and is dated to the rather
narrow limited time span of 15,1 – 14,3 14C uncal Kyr BP. The conducted typological-technological analysis of lithic assemblages
allows us to assert the unity of processing techniques within this type. Such technological, territorial and chronological unity of
sites represent the remnants of one society. These objects have different functional and seasonal characteristics, which create
a unique opportunity to reconstruct certain aspects of life, seasonal mobility cycle, hunting strategy of a group in a common
ecological niche. The base camps were mainly settled during the cold season, while in the warm season there was a more high
activity associated with topographically higher relief areas. The logistic model of annual mobility implies the presence of base
camps in the center of the movement of the group, on the one hand and short-term camps, kill-sites, gathering of flintstone
places on the other.
Planigraphic features of the settlement structures indicate a sectoral use of residential areas. The center of each one is a mammoth bone dwelling structure, around which there are functionally distinct objects and areas. The design of the dwellings exhibits
a rhythmed and symmetrical disposal of bones in the structure. The renewal of internal space investigation inside the preserved
fourth dwelling of Mezhyrich tends to confirm a sectoral location of functionally defined areas. The spatial distribution of sites
and objects indicates the presence of a centralized structure of behaviour, which manifests itself at different hierarchical levels:
dwelling, residential assemblage, base camp and subsistence territory.
