IT’S ARCHAEOLOGY BUT NOT AS WE KNOW IT: ENVISAGING A FUTURE FOR IN SITU CONSERVATION
Author(s): Allen, Caitlin (The University of Sydney)
Presentation Format: Oral
A 2017 article by Hoberg, Holtorf, May and Wollentz, based on interviews with archaeologists on the subject of heritage futures,
observed an absence of effort “to understand how the future will differ from today and how it therefore requires decisions and
strategies in the present that differ from what we would think is best for our own society now.” But this begs a number of questions. What do archaeologists think is best for society now? Do these assumptions reflect public perspectives? What are the
specific public benefits delivered by archaeology if any? How can the future be predicted and planned for if archaeologists don’t
understand what is happening in the present?
My doctoral research is demonstrating that the way the products of archaeological work, specifically in situ conservation, are
received by the public is poorly understood within the archaeological profession. Interviews and surveys with nearly 100 heritage professionals and 350 users of conserved archaeological sites in urban contexts in Australia have demonstrated a disjunct
between intention and reception. This is particularly the case when moving beyond the didactic transmission of archaeological
information and the conservation of “heritage values”, to areas such as individual and collective wellbeing and the role of archaeology in creating enjoyable and liveable urban environments.
This evidence-based understanding of relationships between people and archaeological places in the present, indicates new
ways of thinking about in situ conservation. A future-making approach where the understood present supports creation of the
desired future. One in which archaeological expertise does not try to shape society to appreciate an archaeological view of the
past, but rather, the practice of archaeological conservation is shaped by the needs of and benefits to diverse communities.
