NOBLE CLASS IN THE ‘ANCIENT DANISH KINGDOM’: THE STORY AND HISTORIOGRAPHICAL
CONSEQUENCES OF ONE MISREADING
Author(s): Sukhino-Khomenko, Denis (University of Gothenburg)
Presentation Format: Oral
Throughout present-day Denmark and Sweden are scattered 46 runic inscriptions commemorating certain ‘thegns’ and 73 in
memory of ‘drengs’, but up until 1927 these runestones attracted little attention on the part of the researches. In that year,
Danish historian and archivist Sven Aakjær (1894–1963) published his most famous and influential article to re-evaluate the traditional reading (‘[mature/young] man’ respectively). Instead, he concluded that these lexemes closely correlated to the usage in
England and used to be technical terms for strata in the royal retinue (ON hirð) in the ‘ancient Danish kingdom’.
Ever since then the Scandinavian historiography has been divided on this problem. Some pointed out the lack of native solid evidence in Aakjær’s thesis, while other wholeheartedly embraced it. The latter had far-reaching historiographical consequences,
as Aakjær’s interpretation has on multiple occasions been used in the account of early medieval Danish politogenesis (Klavs
Randsborg, Peter Sawyer, Carl Löfving, et al.): thegns and drengs, understood as royal agents in the land, testified to the authority and deep reach of the newly-formed Danish monarchy. This postulate has penetrated the Scandinavian historical discourse so
deeply that it is even reflected in popular media, e.g. at the exhibition at ‘Kata Gård’ (Västergötland).
However, closer scrutiny of Aakjær’s original article reveals that his whole argumentation was built on ‘quicksand’: a misreading
of the mid-12th-century English quasi-legal treatise ‘Constitutiones de Foresta’ that Aakjær believed to be a genuine production
of King Cnut’s reign (1016/18–35), though this interpretation had been firmly refuted already in 1894.
The proposed article is going to address three key points:
•
How did this misreading nearly reached the status of a ‘fact’?
•
What historiographical consequences followed it?
•
Why is it vital to meticulously venture ‘ad fontes’ when conducting historical research?
