GLOBALISATION, THE HIGHEST STAGE OF MODERNISATION?
Author(s): Nappo, Dario (University of Naples Federico II)
Presentation Format: Oral
The use of globalisation theory to describe and analyse the ancient World has generated a rich debate. There are several issues
related to the use of such term for Antiquity, first of all because of its vague and indefinite meaning even when used to describe
the contemporary World.
In many ways, ‘Globalisation’ is a buzzword, heir to the old ‘Romanisation’, which has been a popular topic in scholarship for decades in the 20th century. Romanisation is now a long-dismissed concept, for its intellectual laziness and ideological implications.
Globalisation theory provides scholars with a big opportunity, to start afresh with a new intellectual and theoretical tool that
might provide them with a better comprehension of Antiquity. The first obvious benefit is the fact that ‘Globalisation’, unlike ‘Romanisation’ is a more neutral word, with fewer ideological implications. Yet, this might also become a methodological weakness,
as long as Globalisation is only a politically correct version of Romanisation.
Such a methodological concern has a parallel in the wider context of theories and models applied to the study of Antiquity. Since
the last decade of the nineteenth century, models and theories in history progressively gave way to cliometrics and quantification analyses, tools which, while allowing the processing of large datasets, usually failed to provide a meaningful interpretation
for them.
This paper will concentrate on some economic features of ancient globalisation. Its aim is to add to the theoretical debate on
Globalisation, investigating the difference between ancient and modern globalisation, starting from the assumption that globalisation is the final product of change in any given society, rather than the agent of such change. Assuming this point of view,
Globalisation theory becomes, in my view, a very powerful tool to accomplish a fuller comprehension of ancient civilisations and
of the economic dynamics of premodern societies.
