GOING INTO THE DEEP BLUE SEA: NEW INSIGHTS INTO THE COLONISATION OF THE CANARY ISLAND IN
THE ANTIQUITY
Author(s): Santana, Jonathan (Durham University) - Morales, Jacob (Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria) - Fregel, Rosa
(Universidad de La Laguna) - Rodríguez, Amelia (Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria)
Presentation Format: Oral
This contribution explores the timing and patterns of the colonisation of the Canary Islands (Northwestern Africa). The first settlement on this oceanic archipelago represents the westernmost limits of Mediterranean human colonisation in the antiquity.
Most archaeological, anthropological, and paleogenomic evidence suggests that the pioneer population came from North Africa.
Furthermore, the archaeological evidence indicates that, after their arrival, these first colonists remained isolated until a new
colonisation wave, this time by the Europeans in the 14-15th centuries AD. The chronology of the first settlements has yet to
be properly resolved, and there is great uncertainty about the factors that droved them to explore and colonise these islands.
There are several hypotheses about this topic, considering different archaeological and historical data: 1) A Phoenician/Punic
enterprise dating from the early first millennium BC is mainly based on radiocarbon dates of non-identified charcoal and affinities
of material culture items. 2) A Roman colonisation at the late first millennium BC that occupied and exploited the islands as a
place that could provide different valuable commodities. It is based in Roman evidences from Lanzarote Island and Lobos islet. 3)
A third one proposes that the archipelago was settled down by farmers from North Africa at the first millennium AD, and it does
not consider a commercial goal in this enterprise. The current accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) dates appear to support
the latter hypothesis, at least for Gran Canaria. Furthermore, paleogenomic evidence indicates that the colonisation process
involved multiple waves of migration that are poorly understood so far. We take into consideration all the available evidence to
produce an update picture of this process in Gran Canaria Island as a model that could be considered for the entire archipelago.
