BIOARCHAEOLOGICAL AND MULTI-ISOTOPIC INVESTIGATIONS ON MEDIEVAL HUMAN SKELETONS
FROM THE MONASTIC GRAVEYARD AT BADIA POZZEVERI (ITALY)
Author(s): Amaro, Alessio (Department of Civilizations and Form of Knowledge, University of Pisa) - Fuller, Benjamin (Department of Archaeology and Heritage Studies, Aarhus University) - Fornaciari, Antonio - Giuffra, Valentina (Department of Translational Research and New Technologies, University of Pisa) - Mannino, Marcello (Department of Archaeology and Heritage
Studies, Aarhus University)
Presentation Format: Oral
The number of bioarchaeologically-informed isotope reconstructions of diet in Medieval Italy are still few and even fewer studies
have focussed on people buried in monastic cemeteries. The goal of our project is to start filling this gap in research by undertaking carbon, nitrogen, sulphur and strontium isotope analyses on bone and teeth collagen of individuals inhumated within the
monastic complex of Badia Pozzeveri, near Altopascio (Lucca). This abbey lay on the Via Francigena, the route taking pilgrims
from France to Rome.
Badia Pozzeveri belonged to the Camaldolese branch of the Benedictine order and was active from the late 11th century until
the late 14th century. This institution controlled numerous economic activities within its territory, including cereal cultivation,
milling, cattle herding and the exploitation of aquatic resources from Lago di Sesto. Historical sources indicate that the diet of
the monks included wheat, millet, eggs, beans, chestnuts, beef and fish (i.e. eels), as well as olive oil and wine.
In order to achieve our research objectives, we have sampled 49 individuals, whose biological profile has been established
through detailed bioarchaeological examination. The specimens originate from different types of burials attributable to local
people of different social levels. The population from Badia Pozzeveri did not suffer from serious diseases attestable osteologically and was healthy. Periostitis, caries and fractures have been detected in both males and females. Four healed wounds,
inflicted on a cranium with a sword, could attest the presence of surgeons able to deal with such lesions and enabling longer life
expectancy. Our study aims not only to reconstruct the diet of inhumated individuals from the abbey, but also to evaluate their
social status by combining archaeological, anthropological and isotopic sources of evidence.
