AN INTRODUCTION: UNFRAMING ANCIENT FIGURINES
Author(s): Aston, Alexander (University of Oxford) - Murphy, Céline (The Heritage Management Organization, Athens)
Presentation Format: Oral
Figurines occupy a unique space within the archaeological record as some of the oldest artefactual images created by humans.
It is presently noticeable, however, that their analysis has been complicated by two main factors: on the one hand, changing
theoretical perspectives on the relationships between mind, matter and technology, and, on the other, the application of methodologies employed for the examination of artefacts such as ancient tools or domestic wares to their study. Such approaches
have frequently resulted in attempts at ‘explaining’ figurines and in the assumption that, given their lack of clear practical and
functional uses compared to other artefact types, figurines only have symbolic potential.
Interested in shifting this framework, we here explore and discuss the implications of applying aesthetic and ergonomically-rooted values employed in the study of artefacts, such as tools or domestic wares, to ancient figurines. In doing so, we first argue
that figurines are a category of artefacts in its own right of which the technical and aesthetic aspects cannot be compared with
those of other types of artefacts. Second, and consequently, we suggest that perspectives on design, style and skill need to
be redefined in the context of figurine studies. Third, we therefore argue that the use of experimental programs in research on
figurines is therefore advisable. Discussions on design, style and skill can be significantly deepened by physical examinations of
the artefacts and engagement with the materials.
Experimental studies on materials and perception, evidence from neuroscience, non-representational approaches to semiotics,
and Anti-Cartesian models of cognition all open up space to critique and redefine our understanding of the design, meanings and
functional uses of figurines. They subvert traditional assumptions and allow for the development of novel explanations.”
