HOW SHOULD WE STUDY PREHISTORIC ECONOMY?
Author(s): Tóth, Peter (Masaryk University)
Presentation Format: Oral
According to Ian Hodder (1982), there are three basic approaches in analyses of human economic behavior in the past: substantivism, formalism, and social exchange. The substantivists tends to focus on relationships between people and on the different
types of exchange mechanisms such as reciprocity, redistribution, and market systems. The formalism focuses on analytical
techniques that would allow particular modes of distribution to be identified (e.g. regression analyses), assuming that universal
concepts of economic theory - scarcity, maximization, surplus - are applicable in economic anthropology. Finally, social exchange
studies, mixing both formalism and substativism, involve social strategies, and functional interrelationships, such as the availability of resources, and control over production.
Formal mathematical approaches to the study of prehistoric exchange are of value in that they allow a better description of functional relationships. In this presentation, I discuss spatio-temporal modeling as a method of choice able to interconnect social
and economic processes of larger territories.
Spatio-temporal modeling relates to problems where we want to analyze and predict how something varies over space and/or
time. Such problems can exist in widely different spatial and temporal scales. It is based on a gradual transformation of relative
dating of archaeological sites into a temporal scale. As a result, each site has assigned a temporal uncertainty in a predefined
temporal block. The transformed datasets can be used for more advanced analysis, such as an investigation of cultural, social
and economic processes as well as a comparison of settlement dynamics by interpolation of temporal uncertainty. This background can be also used in subsequent agent-based modeling.
For archaeologists, the combination of spatio-temporal modeling and agent-based modeling can be very useful, because we can
simulate and observe human behavior in changing social, economic, environmental and cultural conditions across space and
time.
