A PILE DWELLING IN DEEP WATER? COMBINED MICROMORPHOLOGICAL AND MACROSCOPIC
OBSERVATIONS FROM A NEOLITHIC SITE (CHAM-BACHGRABEN, SWITZERLAND)
Author(s): Pümpin, Christine - Ismail-Meyer, Kristin (Integrative Prehistory and Archaeological Science - IPAS, University of Basel) - de Capitani, Annick (Amt für Denkmalpflege und Archäologie, Kanton Zug) - Rentzel, Philippe (Integrative Prehistory and
Archaeological Science - IPAS, University of Basel) - Schaeren, Gishan (Amt für Denkmalpflege und Archäologie, Kanton Zug)
Presentation Format: Oral
From 2009 to 2013, the Neolithic lakeshore settlement of Cham-Bachgraben (Switzerland) on the shore of modern-day Lake
Zug was excavated over an area of 4000 m2. In the best-preserved sector below a street built in 1540 AD, several settlement
layers were uncovered and large profiles documented: From 3124 to 1600 BC, the site was occupied during the so-called Horgen and the Schnurkeramik (Corded Ware) period, as well as during the Early Bronze Age. Adjacent to the historical street, a
reduction layer was present including findings from all three periods. Some of the better-preserved settlement layers were rich
in charcoals and ceramics, others in stones or loam lenses. The characteristic organic-rich layers, well-known from many lakeshore settlements, were missing. This arose the pivotal question for micromorphological analyses: Did the drainage of the lake
of 1591/92 AD induce an aerobic degradation of organic rich layers? Further, the formation process of the reduction layer was
another important issue.
The micromorphological study comprised the analysis of 59 profile columns including the natural sediments above and below
the settlement layers. In some layers the alteration of organic material occurred during synsedimentary processes, indicating
a (semi-) terrestrial depositional environment and challenging the idea that Cham-Bachgraben was in fact a classical lakeshore
settlement, comparable to e.g. Zürich-Parkhaus Opéra (ZH) or Zug-Riedmatt (ZG). For the investigation of the reduction layer,
micromorphological observations were insufficient and a macroscopic approach was needed in order to shed light on the site
formation process.
