COPPER METALLURGY IN CORSICA AND CIRCULATION NETWORKS BETWEEN THE ALPS AND SICILY
Author(s): Pascal, Tramoni (Institut National de Recherches Archéologiques Préventives)
Presentation Format: Oral
Twenty-five years ago, the Corsican Neolithic chronocultural framework was still being developed. A multidisciplinary research
about the island’s megalithic tradition was then engaged and intended to give context to the various manifestations of the
phenomenon, for which the cultural sequence of the Neolithic had to be fixed. In a first phase, between 5800 and 3400 BC, a
clear cultural integration with neighbouring Sardinia is noted together with a clear pulse of influx from the south of the Tyrrhenian
Sea. In a later phase, from 4000/3900 BC, the Corsican Recent Neolithic fragmented into various facies. It was on this cultural
substrate that the Terrinian culture and the first copper metallurgy emerged.
Over the past decade, the rise of rescue archaeology has allowed a wider investigation of Terrinian settlement sites, resulting in
new significant insights across various fields, from material productions to architectural forms, the organization and evolution
of settlements, as well as economy and exploitation of natural resources.
Knowledge of cupriferous metallurgy has improved with new archaeological and archaeometric data. Although the precocity of
metallurgy is still being discussed, a model of small interconnected local centres of metallurgical production can now be proposed.
Current data on the origin of technical transfers point to exchanges with the Alpine regions and Central Europe. Corsica would
thus testify to an overall shift of spheres of influence and networks from south to north across the whole Neolithic. This new
configuration continued until the beginning of the Middle Bronze age, when networks seem to rebalance in favour of multipolar
exchanges.
With the sustained development of rescue archaeology, new data has been increasing, allowing both to sharpen micro-regional
insights and to re-evaluate supra-regional matters. It is in this direction that archaeological research of the next decade in Corsica must be engaged.
