INTERSTITIAL WASTELANDS AS ANTIDOTE TO URBAN MONOCULTURE?
Author(s): Stadhouders, Karin (Leiden University, Centre for Global Heritage and Development)
Presentation Format: Oral
Heritage as a concept is intrinsically dynamic, determined by values and valuations that change over time. Furthermore, most
landscapes and places we value as cultural heritage result from a history of continuous change and adaptation. Paradoxically, we
are inclined to rigorously preserve and proudly exhibit our acknowledged relics as unalterable entities.
Thus movement and stasis compete in heritage landscapes, specifically in compact urban landscapes. These are at risk to develop into monocultural areas, where the only remaining dynamics waver between preserving heritage and top-down efforts to
sanitise rubble-space, between facilitating tourism and controlling its negative effects. Such one-sided views on heritage management and planning eventually hamper innovation, cultural diversity, liveability, and from a heritage perspective: the creation
of ‘new’ urban heritage.
Fruitful new dynamics will need ‘free space’: space for experiments, creativity and spontaneous engagement. Free physical
space may be scarce in compact cities, but the main obstacles for free space are rather found in immaterialities: impatience, and
the will to keep control.
We may learn from the recent history of the rehabilitation of post-industrial wastelands. Since the 1970s an increasing number
of wastelands from the industrial era, often situated in urban areas, have been rediscovered, revalued, and found new functions.
Many of these previously neglected places are now popular, even officially qualified as cultural heritage. The growing body of
research on this topic shows diverging experiences and opinions, critical perspectives, and ambiguities. Many findings, though,
point to the positive impact of spontaneous, unplanned (temporary) uses of left-over places, abandoned buildings, empty plots.
An over-arching aspect seems the refrainment from structured planning, either out of necessity or as deliberate policy choice.
In my paper I explore this aspect, evaluating if and how interstitial urban wastelands function as free spaces fostering engagement and creativity, as well as creating ‘new’ urban heritage.
