PRIORITISING PUBLIC VALUES IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
Author(s): Tung, Yu-tz (Institute of Archaeology, University College London)
Presentation Format: Oral
The archaeological site management methods have suggested the significance of understanding and balancing values, i.e. values-based approaches by Getty Conservation Institute and the Australian ICOMOS Burra Charter. The post-processual reflexivity demands archaeologists to the public into not only access the results but also the management processes to demonstrate
the resources spent are for public good. The roles of local community are also emphasized in international guidelines as the 5C
and sustainable heritage management for cultural diversity, which indicated it is the professionals’ responsibility to better understand and integrate public values into management decisions. These approaches aim to establish a link between public and
heritage, in addition to have professionals explore the archaeological heritage from public perspectives. The Heritage Lottery
Fund has recognised public values as internal, instrumental and institutional, which a sustainable management ought to be a balance of the three aspects. Taiwan, though late in developing its archaeological heritage management framework, has followed
the international trends as well as the grassroot groups’ outcry for native heritage. Increasing demands to respect public values
can be found in the amended legal frameworks and cultural policies besides the long existed professional concerns. It is interesting to investigate the management processes of one of the designated prehistoric sites in Taiwan, Huilai, with values-based
approaches. The analyses comprise of the stakeholders and values, decision-making processes, its uses, and anticipations. This
case study demonstrates diverse values of different scopes, of economic, use and cultural by authorities, professionals, private
developers, local communities or wider people who visit the site. These assessments allow us to observe identity building of the
Taiwanese public on the sense of place. Values-based approaches lend a lens for comprehensive assessments of the context,
and serve as guidelines to critique the conflicts and provide recommendations effectively elaborating public values, further
attain sustainable developments.
