THE SOUND OF STONES. A STUDY IN A TEMPLE IN THE ARGENTINE ANDES
Author(s): Balbi, Jose (Colchester Archaeological Group; Ministerio de Cultura y Educación, Buenos Aires) - Buffalino, Eduardo
(ISFD Instituto Superior de Formación Docente)
Presentation Format: Oral
The aim of this work is to present the discovery of an Inka temple located in the most important city south of the capital of the
Empire, Cuzco.
”El Shincal de Quimivil”, located in Argentina, was an important Inka administrative and religious center in the Kollasuyu, it was
excavated and studied archaeologically from Alberto Rex González in the 60’s, who arrived at a part of it, for Rodolfo A. Raffino,
from the 70’s and many other professionals to this day.
One of the structures, Complex 19, was mistakenly considered a military fortress until the completion of a series of archaeological works between 2015 and 2018, before which it was called ”El Atalaya” (The Watchtower).
The reason that the military function was discarded and considered a temple, was determined with the first excavations, in which
was found a ceremonial furnace, several libaderos, and a central rock with a series of channels and tubes excavated by hand,
whose filling with water would end up indicating some kind of religious ceremony and even some rite of divination.
It is known the existence of a series of Andean musical instruments, especially made of ceramics, which produce sounds with
the placement of liquids, or the simple blowing. Our work begins with the study of these instruments and the attempt to produce
sounds on this stone structure carved in a rock of the American Andes in one of the sacred cities of a culture that considered the
sounds produced by the instruments as part of their rites and customs.
Our work is experimental, and as novel as archeology musicology itself. We will expose the applied methodology and the development of new techniques to determine if these structures produced sounds that modern man has not yet heard.
