IS IT LONELY IN THE MOUNTAINS? PATTERNS OF ISOLATION AND INTERACTION IN LATE BRONZE AGE
THRACE
Author(s): Nenova, Denitsa (UCL)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the southeast corner of the Balkan peninsula an assorted set of landscapes, commonly known as Thrace, constitutes of river
valleys and vast plains divided by mountain chains. The area has played a connecting role in the prehistoric communications
between the Aegean coast and Anatolia on the one hand, and continental Europe, on the other. It seems that this geomorphological segmentation and the particularities of its geopolitical location have influenced the lifestyles and the direction of people’s
interactions across the region and have naturally encouraged the existence of local as well as interregional routes.
Despite its ecological fragmentation, the area has often been considered and studied as an entity, manifesting a homogeneous
unit rather than shifting prehistoric cultural assembly across the landscape. What seems challenging is the dominant idea of a
single, sizeable ethnocultural group inhabiting the area throughout the latter part of the 2nd millennium, which is both unlikely
and risks ignoring abundant evidence of a local difference. Recent data suggests habitation diversity, both spatially and chronologically defined, which differs significantly in material culture and settlement patterns from contemporary lowland groups and
societies. Such distinction, however, cannot be explained merely by ‘lowland agricultural’ or ‘mountain cattle’ cultures but embraces more complex cultural dynamics. For example, during the Late Bronze Age the Rhodope Mountains get ‘repopulated’ after
a long chronological hiatus following the end of the fourth millennium BC; even then the Rhodope sub-region reveals a pattern of
isolation typical for traditional mountain societies, but also recognizable through nomadic or semi-nomadic arrays and specific
religious landscapes rather than sedentary occupation. The mechanisms of such diachronic interaction between higher altitude
places and the human choices hidden in the landscape are the topic of the current paper.
