TOWARDS A LOCAL DISTINCTIVENESS IN VERNACULAR ROMAN ARCHITECTURE. A THEORY OF
REGIONAL DIVERSITY
Author(s): Kienzle, Peter (LVR Archaeological Park Xanten)
Presentation Format: Oral
Architectural history traditionally focused on the big three: church, castle, palace (meaning: religious, defensive and representative buildings). Traditional vernacular buildings such as farmsteads, workshops, barns and civil houses have been marginal within
the scope of research. A small group of researchers, frequently connected to farmhouse open-air museums, established the
sub-discipline of “Hausforschung”. The scholars identified regional diversity in vernacular architecture based on a set of basic
issues such as availability of material (mud, clay, timber, stone,…), climatic conditions (hot, cold, stormy, rain, snow,…), economic
system (farming, cattle breeding, manufacturing, …), legislation (building laws, heritage laws, …) etc. Due to these issues particular housing landscapes developed as far as vernacular buildings are concerned while religious, defensive or representative
buildings stick to more general plans or fashions.
In Roman archaeology research has focused on important buildings (temple, bath, place, city walls, …) while local houses played
a lesser role. However, to date a lot of individual houses from Roman times have been excavated and the results published in
local or national journals or books. Frequently, houses from other parts of the Roman Empire are employed to interpret missing
or questionable parts of the excavated structure disregarding if these buildings are comparable in terms of climatic condition,
availability of building materials or economic system. This contribution argues, that by now it should be possible to put forward an
idea of regional differences within vernacular Roman archaeology based on the principles develop by the “Hausforschung” of traditional houses in central Europe. A long term goal may be the creation of a map of regional Roman vernacular building landscapes.
