LEPROSY: A LONG TRIP THROUGH EURASIA
Author(s): Serangeli, Matilde (Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena)
Presentation Format: Oral
Despite being among the oldest chronic and degenerative infectious diseases in the world, leprosy’s origins still remain elusive.
Ancient Indic texts and osteological and archaeological evidence suggest the presence of leprosy in India since the 3rd mill. BC,
possibly spreading from Eastern Africa or the Near East. Based on whole-genome analysis, the diffusion of the most recent ancestor of Mycobacterium leprae, the main causative agent of leprosy, spans from the 13th cent. BC to the 1st cent. AD. Comparative genomics reveals a high diversity of strains of M. leprae circulating in Europe during the Middle Ages, which suggests that
the disease may have spread in Europe in multiple waves and directions. Scarcity of compelling evidence in historical records
preceding the Common Era, combined with the low number of ancient genomes analyzed, suggests that accurate results on its
origin and diffusion have yet to come.
Following the path established by D. Anthony for the study of prehistoric migrations, this paper aims at bringing Indo-European
comparative linguistics into the investigation of the route of leprosy through Eurasia before the Common Era. The history of the
Indo-European lexicon denoting leprosy may have implications in the debate on the dispersal of the Indo-European speaking
peoples from the homeland to their historical settlements. In particular, this study may cast light on the controversial separation of the Indo-Iranian branch: should the oldest Eurasian presence of leprosy be located in India around the 3rd mill. BC, then
the corresponding Indo-Iranian terminology, i.e. the Indo-European branch to which Old Indic belongs, is expected to reveal a
Proto-Indo-Iranian or a Proto-Indo-European origin. Unfortunately, the Indo-Iranian branch itself shows more than one root to
express leprosy, and Indo-European terms for leprosy are not exclusive to Indo-Iranian, making it more difficult to identify a Proto-Indo-Iranian or a Proto-Indo-European term for it.
