PAST AND MODERN FUZZINESS: HOW TO FIND OUT MORE ABOUT FINAL PALAEOLITHIC MOBILITY
PATTERNS
Author(s): Grimm, Sonja (ZBSA - Centre for Baltic and Scandinavian Archaeology; CRC 1266 “Scales of Transformation”) Knitter, Daniel (CRC 1266 “Scales of Transformation”; CAU Kiel, Institute of Geography, research group physical geography,
landscape ecology, and geoinformation) - Hamer, Wolfgang (CRC 1266 “Scales of Transformation”; CAU Kiel, Institute of Geography, research group physical geography, landscape ecology, and geoinformation) - Serbe, Benjamin - Eriksen, Berit (ZBSA
- Centre for Baltic and Scandinavian Archaeology; CRC 1266 “Scales of Transformation”)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Final Palaeolithic record of northern Germany is relatively scarce and despite the famous Ahrensburg Tunnel Valley sites poor
in organic preservation. On these few sites with good organic preservation, seasonal indicators suggest that hunter-gatherer
groups were present there during the autumn season. Hence, a picture was occasionally developed of seasonal incursions into
this landscape by hunter-gatherers. This picture is contrasted by the number and distribution of sites leaving the question of
how we envisage the settlement patterns of these hunter-gatherers in the south-western Baltic region.
We approached this in three different chronological slices during the Weichselian Lateglacial in northern German: The Hamburgian period (GI-1e-d), the Federmesser-Gruppen/Brommean period (GI-1c-a), and the Ahrensburgian (GS-1). These three periods
are also related with different stage in the environmental development and that may have a first influence on the preservation,
identification, and distribution of the sites.
We fed our knowledge about the site distributions and the landscape into geospatial analyses using R to identify non-random
parameters. Furthermore, we phrased hypotheses about the Final Palaeolithic settlement behaviour and tested them against
our landscape models. Based on the different results, we developed fuzzy based scenarios for the mobility strategies of Final
Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers. The archaeological interpretation of these mathematical results of geographic models explicitly
show how our decisions and theoretical pre-conceptions as modern-day scientists influence the results. Hence, we should always be aware of these to prevent mis-guided interpretations of the past.
