“HISTORY POTS”: SOCIOCULTURAL AND COMMERCIAL EXCHANGE THROUGH THE CASE STUDY OF
THE PUNIC-ROMAN CITY OF CARTEIA (SAN ROQUE, CADIZ, SPAIN)
Author(s): Sánchez Moral, Carmen María (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid)
Presentation Format: Oral
Communication and trading hubs have always been optimal points to get an insight into cultural contacts and the transmission,
exchange and assumption of different cultural features associated with and derived from it. Thus, the main aim of this paper
is to address these phenomena of cultural interaction through the analysis of the ceramics found at the Punic and Roman port
town of Colonia Libertinorum Carteia (San Roque, Cádiz, Spain). The interest of the exceptional case study of Carteia lays on its
geostrategic location as the keystone of the arch of the Bay of Gibraltar. That is to say, a place between two continents, two
seas and two bays.
While this interdisciplinary study will be multifocal and holistic, special attention will be paid to foodways, since gastronomy is
an undeniable cross-sectional cultural marker. Being fundamental to human existence, food consumption implies a deeper dimension beyond mere subsistence, since it is the result of a cultural interpretation. Hence, we will focus on their primary pottery
evidence -kitchenware and tableware-, crucial yet silent witnesses of daily culinary practices, although different pottery classes
will also be taken into account. Moreover, this contribution will be organised diachronically in order to analyse the evolution and
variation of social and commercial trends and their impact on local culinary tradition, as well as the relation -the “dialogue”- between imported ceramics and local productions during the transition from Late Punic to Roman Republican periods. These aspects prove to be highly enriching in terms of tracking the eventual arrival of new people, given the integration of Carteia in the
Roman Empire as a colony - one of the first colonies with Latin rights outside the Italian Peninsula.
Vessels and cooking pots that become true “History pots” when put in the light of Archaeology.
