TRADITIONS OF THE FUNERARY RITUALS FROM THE SUB-DANUBIAN AREA IN THE NECROPOLISES OF
LONGOBARDS AND BULGARIANS ALONG ITALIAN ADRIATIC SIDE
Author(s): Rapuano, Silvana - Rotili, Marcello (Università della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli)
Presentation Format: Oral
During the 3-4 th century A.D., in the border territories of the Roman Empire inhomogeneous groups of Germanic culture were
introduced, to which the defense of the empire was entrusted.
Already in the past, from the 2th century A.D. on, there had been the introduction of communities in various ways (inquilini, laeti,
gentiles), with differentiated tax and military obligations. This had led to the start of integration of Germanic groups, of steppe
peoples and communities coming from Middle Eastern areas through the purpose of repopulating the sparsely inhabited territories and of increasing production activities and the defense of the imperial borders.
In this cultural melting pot the story of the Longobard people and of some of Bulgari’s aliquots, which in 5-6th century settled in
the area south of the Danube. In this territory, acquired elements of Mediterranean culture and practices taken from the steppe
populations with whom they come into contact. For example, from the Àvars was assimilated the pagan rite of the sacrifice of
the horse laid with the rider. The cultural heritage acquired was so strong that it was still evident in the 7th century, when the
Lombards with a small following of other ethnic groups had settled permanently in Italy since more than one century.
Numerous cemeteries with row tombs, such as those identified along the Morava and the Danube, were found in the Italian territory with grave goods including weapons and tools for daily life, influenced by both the Merovingian and Middle-Germanic culture,
and the Àvar and Slavic cultures, to which, later, symbolic objects of Christianity were added, such as crosses in gold foil. The
contribution will review, above all, the necropolis found along the Adriatic side, in Friuli, in the Marches and, specially, in Molise,
where graves belonging to Bulgarian groups have also been found.
