UNDERWATER CULTURAL HERITAGE AT RISK: BEST PRACTICES FOR DOCUMENTING MARINE
RESOURCES
Author(s): Ayers-Rigsby, Sara - Scott-Ireton, Della (Florida Public Archaeology Network) - Altmeier, Brenda (NOAA) - Corns,
Anthony - Henry, Sanda (CHERISH) - Kangas, Rachael - Moates, Jeff (FPAN) - Pollard, Edward - Shaw, Robert - Shine, Linda
(CHERISH)
Presentation Format: Oral
Collaboration is key in protecting underwater cultural heritage. In April of 2019, researchers from Climate Heritage & Environments of Reefs, Islands and Headlands (CHERISH) visited the Florida Keys to meet with the Florida Public Archaeology Network
(FPAN), present their research, and encourage transatlantic partnership.
Underwater cultural heritage off the coast of Florida is managed by both state and federal entities. These sites provide archaeological information, serve as critical resources for biodiversity, and drive diving tourism to the area. FPAN has developed a series
of workshops for recreational divers with the goals of raising awareness of underwater cultural heritage and helping communities protect these resources.
In 2018, following the successful launch of FPAN’s Heritage Monitoring Scouts (HMS) Florida Program, a citizen science initiative to document at-risk terrestrial sites, FPAN conducted the first Submerged HMS program in collaboration with the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The goal behind this partnership is to engage and train local citizen scientists
to document environmental change at these sites, particularly after major events like a hurricane.
CHERISH partners across Ireland and Wales are establishing their own citizen science programme in an aid to monitoring and
recording the marine historic environment. The emulation and transfer of the activities carried out by FPAN and the HMS program
will be critical in the development and evolution of guidance on community marine recording. Critical evaluation of the different
marine archaeology licensing regimes and how they encourage active community involvement in monitoring as well as deter
human impacts to fragile resources will also be explored.
Only by integrating efforts from the federal level down through the local community, and working collaboratively with colleagues
in other disciplines can professional archaeologists expand their reach and focus their efforts on sites which will be the most
impacted by climate change.
