ARROWHEADS AND OTHER MARKERS OF THE LATE NEOLITHIC COMMUNITIES FROM THE RITUAL
FEATURES OF THE BELL BEAKERS IN NORTH-EASTERN POLAND
Author(s): Klecha, Aleksandra (The Antiquity of Southeastern Europe Research Centre University of Warsaw) - Januszek,
Katarzyna (Institute of Archaeology, University of Warsaw)
Presentation Format: Oral
Over the past few years, four features related to the ritual funerary practices of the Bell Beakers have been discovered at the site
Supraśl 3 in north-eastern Poland. In spite of repetitive and similar sets of artifacts forming the so-called Bell Beakers package,
one of the them (no. 2) stood out from the rest by its content and composition of the deposited items. The objects contained a
relatively large fragment of an ornamented ceramic vessel, on which some sort of a bag, probably made of organic material, had
been placed. This “pouch” was filled with a loamy-sandy sediment, burnt fractions of bones, fragmented amber beads, pieces of
a pottery from various ornamented Bell Beakers’ vessels and flint artifacts, among which three arrowheads were distinguished.
The whole set was covered with a bowl fragment and further artifacts were placed around the deposit.
Since not all of the exotic items are perceived as typical of Bell Beakers communities in Central Europe, an individual approach to
the particular analyses of each group of artifacts can lead to diverging conclusions. If the previous concepts would be used during the investigation, arrowheads could be treated as a cultural identifier. However, one of them, found together with the pottery
fragments, cannot be directly related to the Bell Beakers’ flint manufacture.
Consequently, a multidimensional and coherent analysis of artifacts is the main option for not only determining the origin, but
also the cultural and chronological attributes and probably more importantly, for identifying the creators of those deposits. The
process of association of the items with their actual users belongs to the biggest difficulties of modern archaeology, this is why
conclusions based only on one type of the artifacts usually cannot be taken under general consideration.
