LIVING WORLD HERITAGE CITIES – A CRITICAL REFLECTION ON STAKEHOLDERS’ PARTICIPATION IN
HERITAGE MANAGEMENT
Author(s): Rosetti, Ilaria (University of Antwerp)
Presentation Format: Oral
Cities are living organisms which undergo a perpetual change according to peoples’ uses and needs. When cultural heritage is
embedded in the urban fabric, it experiences tensions between preservation and development, due to the coexistence of multiple values and interests of different stakeholders. In World Heritage Cities, this tension is amplified by the complexity that Outstanding Universal Values (OUVs) bring and by the increasing number of stakeholders who claim connection to cultural assets.
As ‘social inclusivity’ is internationally seen as a key element for the sustainable development of historic cities, the participation
of various stakeholders in decision-making for urban transformation is high on professionals’ agenda.
Recently, scholars have investigated stakeholders’ participation in specific urban development projects, providing valuable insights on local practices worldwide. Despite contextual differences between cases, it is highly relevant to compare their practices in order to draft a broader overview on participation trends. Henceforth, this research aims to investigate these trends, by
reviewing literature on participation, looking at stakeholders who are involved in urban development of historic cities in different
cases and their role during the management process. Furthermore, current participatory practices carried out within the Organization of World Heritage Cities’ network will be investigated though a survey, unveiling local governments’ representatives’
perception of these practices.
This paper focuses on the role that stakeholders have in heritage management in WH cities, looking at behavioral differences
and similarities on a global and regional level. It also reflects on the implications that specific roles can have in defining stakeholders’ responsibilities in the heritage field, and therefore, on the importance that clear definitions of stakeholders’ categories
has. Results can inform policies and planning on an international and local level, by giving a global overview of stakeholders’
participation and setting the basis for further research on a regional and local level.
