ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND ARCHAEOZOOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN THE MEDIEVAL SETTLEMENT OF ENISALA (TULCEA COUNTY, ROMANIA)
Author(s): Stanc, Simina Margareta (Alexandru Ioan Cuza University) - Stănică, Aurel Daniel (Eco-Museum Research Institute
Tulcea) - Cabat, Alexandra - Malaxa, Daniel (Alexandru Ioan Cuza University, Iasi) - Bejenaru, Luminița (Alexandru Ioan Cuza
University, Iasi; Romanian Academy-Iasi Branch, Olga Necrasov Centre of Anthropological Research)
Presentation Format: Poster
In 2014, an archaeological preventive research was carried out outside the build-up areas of the settlement, the commune Enisala Sarichioi, in the Enisala Fortress archaeological site, in order to realise the investment ”Emphasizing the historical heritage
- the Enisala Fortress, specific to the Sarichioi fishing area, Tulcea County” funded by the Operational Program for Fisheries
2007-2013, beneficiary the ”Gavrila Simion” Eco-Museum Research Institute in Tulcea. In the project mentioned above, a sanitary group and septic tank were wanted. Given the small area of 43.67 square meters of the two objectives, a surface research
was preferred.
In the two surfaces (S1-S2) a number of 13 pits were investigated. In S1, 10 pits were investigated, and 3 were investigated
in S2. In 13 residential complexes, a variety of materials were discovered - ceramic fragments, animal bones, fish bones, fish
scales, a raw deer horn, iron arrow tips, a sewing needle, a knife blade, an iron sleeve and an iron horseshoe (fragmentary). In the
lower part of these complexes a small number of ceramic fragments were found, to which the faunal material was added. The
ceramic material dates the complexes researched in the second half of the 15th century.
685 faunal remains have been collected: 49 of fish, 12 of birds and mostly of mammals (624 remains). Domestic mammal remains have the highest frequency (84%) and the identified species are: Bos taurus, Ovis aries, Capra hircus, Sus domesticus,
Equus caballus, Canis familiaris. Cattle is dominant, followed by sheep/goat and pig. Six species of wild mammals have been
identified: Cervus elaphus, Sus scrofa, Capreolus capreolus, Bos primigenius Lepus europaeus, Canis lupus.
This work was supported by a grant of Ministry of Research and Innovation, CNCS – UEFISCDI, project number PN-III-P4-IDPCE-2016-0852, within PNCDI III.
