ON THE CHRONOLOGICAL MARGIN: A BRONZE AGE VILLAGE AT KEHRSATZ, BREITENACHER
(SWITZERLAND)
Author(s): Mamin, Yann - Prétôt, Laure (Service archéologique du canton de Berne)
Presentation Format: Oral
From 2015 to 2018, a settlement dating to the mid/early late Bronze Age was excavated in Kehrsatz, a few kilometres from Bern
(Switzerland). The results of the 15’000 m2 excavation are in the process of being analysed. Several dozen building plans can
be reconstructed. De-spite the inherently poor preservation on such dry land sites, several tens of thousands of pottery sherds
combined with dated charcoal samples from post-holes should allow a chrono-spatial analysis of the excavated part of the site.
Only 500 m to the north, another collection of excavated buildings fall within the same chronological range, suggesting one single settlement existed with a length of more than 800 m (10 ha or more).
Questions into the nature of villages in general relate to Kehrsatz twofold:
•
If the site is single-phased, the village has a defined area and period of use.
•
If however, the on-going analysis shows a diachronic occupation, the site attains a different character: one of coexisting scattered groups of buildings with perhaps more than one nucleus of settlement/agricultural activity.
It is thus the question of the definition of a village that can be investigated in Kehrsatz on a local scale thinking about reasons of
settlement in this location and a regional scale relating to other sites.
In addition, the markedly different spatial organisation of the densely packed and apparently planned lakeside villages of the
Early and Late Bronze Age of the Swiss Plateau compared to the more loosely occupied dry land sites such as Kehrsatz is worth
exploring. Is it a function-al, a cultural or a historical phenomenon?
While at the chronological margins of this session, this contribution will consider the notion of the “village” in a context that does
not provide as precise data as the well-known lakeside settlements that predate and follow them.
