A VALUE-BASED APPROACH TO AN INCLUSIVE ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
Author(s): de Raad, Jesper (Leiden University; Laagland Archeologie; ICOMOS; Blue Shield)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeological heritage is a challenging heritage to manage. Especially, in the Netherlands where most of the archaeological
resources lay underground and spatial development plans rapidly influence the landscape. Policy makers, heritage managers,
spatial planners, and archaeologist established a management system to protect archaeological heritage for future scientific
research.
Current heritage managers have been arguing the benefits of the archaeological resource as a being merely for future scientific
research. Modern heritage managers desire towards a new and more value-based approach of the management system. Reinstate the discussion to why for whom and how society desires to reflect upon the past.
In my master research, the communities benefit from their (archaeological) surrounding as a source of inspiration and knowledge. The communities are using the archaeological monuments as an informative guide from past to present. Therefore, the
physical access of an archaeological monument, as a place to visit, is seen as an asset to the community. The communities value
these sites and feel a social responsibility to take care of the(ir) archaeological monuments.
The session: EAA-2500 - Thinking the future in archaeology and archaeological heritage management aims to address the need
to think and plan for a range of futures in archaeological heritage management, we need to work to a benefit we aim for.
Therefore, we need to pass on our current believes and values, preferably in a well-structured value-based heritage management
system, to the next generation. Of course, These new generations have the full right to choose ‘their’ (archaeological) heritage
and are responsible to care of the past on their turn in time. Thus, all we can do is pass on our current believes to the next generation. In my opinion, we can do so by including communities in all their multiplicities to archaeological heritage, preferably with a
physical place to visit.
