GEOARCHAEOLOGY OF HOLOCENE SOCIONATURAL DISASTERS IN THE HYPERARID COAST OF THE
ATACAMA DESERT
Author(s): Salazar, Diego (Proyecto Fondecyt 11151203; Departamento de Antropología, Universidad de Chile) - vargas, gabriel (Departamento de Geología, Universidad de Chile; Proyecto Fondecyt 1161547) - Guendón, Jean Louis (CNRS - Retired)
- Leon, Tomas (Departamento de Geología, Universidad de Chile) - Andrade, Pedro (Departamento de Antropología, Universidad
de Concepción) - Goff, James (University of New South Wales) - Meza, Camila (Departamento de Geología, Universidad de
Chile)
Presentation Format: Oral
Natural hazards are among the most catastrophic events to affect human societies, especially those inhabiting coastlines. Chile
is a country especially exposed to potential socionatural hazards in coastal areas given its more than 4,200 km coast in the
Pacific Ocean, as clearly shown by diverse recent and historically recorded events in northern Chile, such as the 1868 and 1877
mega-earthquakes and tsunamis or the episodic flooding events throughout the 20th Century, usually associated with ENSO
anomalies.
The recurrent occurrence and diversity of these events challenge our capabilities as a society to manage these disasters and
call for interdisciplinary research aimed at understanding the diversity of coastal socionatural disasters in Chile to foster coastal
resilience. In order to do this, natural hazards have to be recorded over ample temporal scales and their effects and consequenses over human population and cultural change need to be addressed.
Here, we will present results from two complementary research projects aimed at understanding the occurrence and impact of
socionatural distasters throughout the Holocene in the Hyperarid coast of the Atacama Desert. We have focused our research
in the identificacion of megaearthquakes and tsunamis, as well as extreme flooding events.
Both projects combine methodologies and approaches from the earth sciences, archaeology, history and ethnography, including
the study of geomorphological records, morphosedimentary assemblages, multiproxy sedimentary and detailed stratigraphic
studies. From a geoarchaeological perspective, the projects have analyzed the sedimentary sequences of shell middens and
archaeological sites, identifying evidence of deposits and/or erosional surfaces associated with catastrophic events. Identification of catastrophic events have been correlated through stratigraphic and chronological methods to socioscultural transformations and historical trajectories.
Our results have significant implications for the understanding of cultural changes/adaptation in relation to extreme natural
disasters and hazard assessment in the present.
