FOOD ECONOMY AND FOODWAYS OF JEWS AND MUSLIMS THROUGH THE AGES – ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSIGHTS
Theme: Interpreting the archaeological record: artefacts, humans and landscapes
Organisers: Lisowski, Mik (University of Sheffield) - Grau-Sologestoa, Idoia (University of Basel) - Aniceti, Veronica (University
of Sheffield)
Format: Regular session
Food economy and foodways of religious communities are rarely in the main focus of research in archaeology and zooarchaeology. The main reasons behind this are simple: the paucity of the available archaeological data, and the difficulty of attributing
archaeological record to particular religious groups. These problems have been addressed by a number of case studies published
in recent years, which showed the potential of archaeology in identifying the presence of Jews and Muslims in the past, and have
contributed to a growing body of evidence. These studies, however, have mostly been site-specific, and little attention has been
placed on large-scale analysis of development and changes in the foodways of Jews and Muslims. This session aims to address
this issue, bringing together and summarising research from a wide array of archaeological contexts.
We welcome contributions focusing on food economy and foodways within two main themes. The first one is concerned with
food-related interactions between Jews and Muslims or with their Christian neighbours. This may include the analysis of the
quality of animals (size, sex, and age) or meat (specific cuts) traded between local religious majorities and minorities, which may
provide information on the disproportion of power and the relationship of these groups. The second theme concerns regional
changes, developments, and differences in foodways within Jewish and Muslim communities. This includes local status and
wealth of particular Jewish or Muslim households, evolution of kosher and halal foodways, and local food-related traditions in
different countries based on species and body part representation, butchery patterns, supported by material culture and literary
sources.
The session is open to papers using animal remains and/or material culture from Jewish and Muslim archaeological sites of domestic nature from different chronological periods.
