THE LATE ANTIQUITY BURIALS OF VERDIER NORD IN LUNEL-VIEL (FRANCE, HÉRAULT), GRAVES ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF THE NECROPOLIS
Author(s): Djouad, Sélim (Hadès; TRACES - UMR 5608) - Chen, Agathe (Hadès)
Presentation Format: Oral
The township of Lunel-Viel, located in the south of France, has benefited for over 35 years from numerous archaeological researches. In 1985 and 1986, Claude Raynaud’s works have led to unearth a large necropolis used since the end of the IIIrd century until the VIth century, a necropolis which presents the exceptional character to have been completely excavated.
In 2014, a rescue archeology operation, carried out on the locality of Verdier Nord, located on the outskirts of the nearby necropolis, completes the already acquired data. It highlights an occupation with two principal modes of exploitation: a vineyard
from the High Empire and a rural exploitation linked to a craft production in the period of the Lower Empire. Indeed, during the
late Antiquity (between the IVth and the VIth century) the rural development amplified, extended the territory and organized
the occupation according to a fragmented division. On pre-existing bases, a set of ditches was set up to surround and partition
agricultural buildings and installations.
It is within this first unit of exploitation identified in Lunel-Viel that 19 burials were discovered in agrarian context. Apart from any
overall structuring, a large majority of these tombs share the common characteristic of being located near a ditched structure,
sometimes in a strategic layout: at angles or at ends of ditches. They systematically harbor very young children, immature individuals less than 2 years old, or even perinatal individuals. The funerary architecture is variable but always neat.
The location of these burials seems quite significant. Stratigraphy shows that ditches were still visible in the landscape of the
late Antiquity through probable plant, lithic or ceramic markers. Given their location, it is the status of these immature funerary
deposits that questions. Outside the nearby and contemporary necropolis where people of the same age find their place.
