FUNERARY VESSELS AND ORTHODOX BURIAL CUSTOM
Author(s): Panchenko, Konstantin (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
Funerary vessels in Christian Orthodox burials are part of a widespread phenomenon, which is not yet fully understood. Funerary
vessels were adopted as the logical extension to existing antique practice, rather than developing as an Christian innovation. It
is important to note that not all Byzantine cemeteries have graves with vessels, this suggests that the burial vessel was not a
mandatory attribute of the Christian funeral rite. It is known that the tradition to put the vessel in the burial place existed until
the Ottoman conquests. Burial contain generally in the medieval Byzantine Orthodox cemeteries ceramic or glass juglets and
balsamaria, occasionally bowls. Most Byzantine funerary vessels have a narrow high neck and an oval body. In male burials find
vessels more often than in female. The Russian Orthodox funeral rite is a direct heir to the Byzantine tradition. According to this
tradition, after the consecrated oil poured on the deceased the vessel should be put in the coffin. In early stage Russian Orthodoxy ware in graves find seldom or never. Only from the 15 century in Moscow funeral vessels there are on most monastery and
Church cemeteries. It should be noted that the percentage of burials with vessels in Moscow is very close to the data on Byzantine graves. Among the burial vessels of Russia dominated bowls, juglets are not found in any burial. All Russian burial vessels
were not made specifically for burial, they were also used in everyday life as lamps, inkpots, jorams. According to gender and age
indicators, the following situation is recorded in medieval Russia: male burials with vessels (78%) significantly dominate over
female burials (22%); there are no funerary bowls in persons younger than 20 years. Funerary vessels discovery in Byzantine and
Russian tombs imply a common cultural and ritual context.
