FROM ARROWHEADS TO BEHAVIOURAL TRADITIONS: RE-ASSESSING THE LATEGLACIAL
PALAEOHISTORY OF NORTHERN GERMANY
Author(s): Wild, Markus (ZBSA - Centre for Baltic and Scandinavian Archaeology; UMR 7041 ArScAn – Ethnologie préhistorique) - Weber, Mara-Julia (ZBSA - Centre for Baltic and Scandinavian Archaeology; UMR 7041 ArScAn – Ethnologie préhistorique; CRC 1266 Scales of Transformation, CAU Kiel) - Krüger, Sascha - Burau, Tobias - Eriksen, Berit - Grimm, Sonja (ZBSA - Centre for Baltic and Scandinavian Archaeology; CRC 1266 Scales of Transformation, CAU Kiel)
Presentation Format: Oral
Based on the typological classification of lithic points combined with stratigraphic observations, the cultural development in
the south-western Baltic region was considered as relatively clear by the mid-20th century with a succession of classic Hamburgian shouldered points, Havelte tanged points, curve-backed points / Federmesser, Brommian tanged points, and Ahrensburgian
tanged points. However, studying the transitions and transformations of the Final Palaeolithic in this region, the question after
the relation of the groups represented by these specific projectile implements arose again. The general similarity of the lithic assemblages suggested a close relation of the classic Hamburgian and the Havelte Group. The Federmesser-Gruppen (FMG) were
considered as a very different tradition. For the Brommian a relation was suggested to the Ahrensburgian and/or the FMG, rarely
also to the Havelte Group. These associations among the groups were interpreted as repeated expansions by different groups as
well as adaptation to the changing environment or adoption of new ideas by a local population. These occasionally contradictive
interpretations are possibly due to overlaps and gaps in the uneven distribution of (well-) dated assemblages.
In this paper, we assemble different lines of evidence for the early part of the human re-settlement (GI-1e–c) of this part of
northern Europe, namely the phase from the classic Hamburgian to the Havelte Group and the FMG, to test the sustainability of
the primarily typological distinction against technological developments, spatial behaviour, and the environmental conditions.
Based on this, we identify differences and similarities between the relevant groups to point out continuities and breaks in the
archaeological record. In comparison with the natural development, we consider in how far changes in the human-environmental
interactions occur. This way we display the development of behavioural traditions and lines of transmission in their environmental context.
