WELL CONNECTED – MOBILITY IN SETTLEMENT COMMUNITIES IN THE NORTHERN ALPINE FORELAND
(3950-3550 BCE)
Author(s): Heitz, Caroline (University of Bern, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, Prehistory; University of Bern, Oeschger
Centre for Climate Change Research) - Stapfer, Regine (Archäologischer Dienst des Kantons Bern; University of Bern, Institute
of Archaeological Sciences, Prehistory) - Hinz, Martin (University of Bern, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, Prehistory;
University of Bern, Oeschger Centre for Climate Change Research) - Thierrin-Michael, Gisela (University of Fribourg, Department of Geosciences) - Affolter, Jehanne - Wehren, Helena (University of Bern, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, Prehistory) - Emmenegger, Lea (Archäologischer Dienst des Kantons Bern) - Hafner, Albert (University of Bern, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, Prehistory; University of Bern, Oeschger Centre for Climate Change Research)
Presentation Format: Oral
Neolithic wetland sites in the Northern Alpine Foreland dating to the 4th M BCE provide an extraordinary data basis to study
forms of (cross)regional connectedness. Since 2016, in the SNSF-project ‘Mobilities, entanglements and transformations in
Neolithic societies on the Swiss Plateau (3900-3500 BC)’, we have addressed those phenomena by analysing styles and materials of pottery and lithic tools from dendrochronologically dated wetland sites. By adopting a newly elaborated mixed method
approach, we have applied qualitative and quantitative methods of archaeology and archaeometry: impressionistic and computer-aided pottery classification, thin section and (p)XRF, XRD and SEM analyses as well as macroscopic petrographic provenance
determination of lithic tools. Thus, in the rhythm of decades, multiple regimes of mobility and triggered transformations in production and consumption practices of things could be approached:
Settlement communities at Lake Constance and in Upper Swabia were strongly entangled at the end of the 40th c. BCE. In contrast, entanglements intensified to Neckar, the Kraichgau and the Kaiserstuhl regions in the 39th c. BCE. Communities at Lake
Zurich were connected with those in the Trois-Lacs, South Alsace, Lac de Clairvaux and Saône regions at the end of the 39th c.
BCE. It was not until the middle of the 39th c. B.C. that these older networks of relationships gradually disintegrated in favour for
northeast-oriented relations. In Central Switzerland entanglements show ties to the regions of Trois-Lacs, Lake Zurich and South
Alsace at 39th to 37th c. BCE. However, the communities in the Trois-Lacs region were more connected with Eastern France
during that time period. These results on pottery can be contrasted with those of flint tools.
The examinations of directions and ranges of changing entanglements made different regimes of mobility visible, each referring
to various supra-regional, multidirectional networks of relationships.
