THE MODELING OF CULTURAL LAYERS ON SETTLEMENTS IN THE WEST SIBERIA
Author(s): Zelenkov, Alexander - Shibeko, Egor - Tretyakov, Evgeny (University of Tyumen)
Presentation Format: Poster
The settlement archaeology of the West Siberia has urgent problem at interpretation and division of multiple archaeological
cultures and types. Today this situation, which formed in 20th century in view of domination of formation approach, contradicts
modern methodological paradigm and typological constructions. However, many of modern researchers use stereotype about
infrangible connection between ethnos and archaeological culture. Therefore, medieval archaeological cultures of the West Siberia have wide dating and periodization based on ceramics diversity that in our opinion seems like unstable construction, which
require a new facts and arguments. For instance, Bakal culture dates from IV to XIII AD and associates with the Tatar people,
Yudino culture dates from VII to XIII AD and associates with the Mansi people. This chronology demonstrates “evolution development” of concrete ethnos, but it does not reflect archaeological reality and typology features.
In this connection our research aims to verify chronological sequence of archaeological cultures on multilayer archaeological
sites of the West Siberia based on materials of key settlements: Krasnogorskoe, Kolovskoe, Papskoe, Ust’-Tersyukskoe, which
dating between 1st and 2nd millennium AD. In Maple and Voxler programs more than 5000 shreds of ceramic vessels analyzed
in multidimensional space according to stratigraphy indicators and radiocarbon dating. Thereby was recreated the structure of
main cultural layers, including Bakal and Yudino types. We detected two episodes of exploitation of settlements in the Middle
Ages: 1) IV–VIII AD – the Migration period with Bakal materials; 2) IX–XIII AD – the Cuman-Kipchak confederation period with Yudino
artifacts. Now we see that logically right interpretation for this periodization will be local sequences instead of evolution.
In this way, the modelling of cultural layers can show objective cultural structure of archaeological assemblage and renew old
paradigm.
