MAKE LOVE NOT WAR: MACRO-ANALYSIS VERSUS SMALL-SCALE HISTORICAL PROCESS OF IRON AGE
SETTLEMENTS IN KAZAKHSTAN
Author(s): Chang, Claudia (Independent scholar; Research Associate, Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, New York
University)
Presentation Format: Oral
David Anthony’s thesis for large-scale mobility among pastoralists and the effects of warfare and conflict in the Bronze Age in
Eurasia must be examined in greater detail. The trope of pastoral nomads as fierce warriors has gained currency through the use
of analogy with the Scythian and Medieval examples of military confederacies. Anthony suggests at Sintashta settlements in
the southern Urals (fortified settlements, metallurgy, increased numbers of weapons in graves, and the appearance of new warfare technologies such as chariots), social complexity leading to chiefdoms was a product of competition and increased conflict/
warfare. I wish to contrast Anthony’s Bronze Age model for feasting and raiding/fighting to data from the Iron Age settlements of
the Talgar Valley in southeastern Kazakhstan.
World-systems analysis can be applied to fine-grained regional studies of Iron Age settlements in the Talgar region. The impact
of transformative technologies such as the wheel, horse-riding, metallurgy, can also be noted in the Talgar region. Here, the
crafting of pots and ‘everyday’ tools used in domestic households is a product of both local and regional transmissions of technology. Pastoral mobility based on short-distance transhumance combined with agricultural production of wheat, barley and the
two millets at settlement sites dating from 400 BC to AD 100 shows little to no evidence of weaponry. How did nomadic elites
control the distribution of land and social alliances necessary for a localized commoner class of farmers and herders to subsist?
What strategies were used by nomadic confederacies to forge important networks between the Bactrian empires to the west
and the Han Chinese dynasties to the east at the beginning of the formal formation of the silk route(s)? The relationship between
a circumscribed agro-pastoral economy and a pan-regional nomadic confederacy typical of Iron Age period provides contrast and
comparison to Anthony’s discussions.
