THE STABILITY OF THE FACTORS AND INTERPRETATION OF RITUAL FEATURES OF BELL BEAKERS FROM
NORTH-EASTERN POLAND
Author(s): Klecha, Aleksandra (The Antiquity of Southeastern Europe Research Centre University of Warsaw) - Manasterski,
Dariusz (Institute of Archaeology, University of Warsaw)
Presentation Format: Oral
Because of their strong semantic meaning, archaeological finds of ritual character are a perfect illustration for the conceptual
variability of the interpretation. In this case, four features of Bell Beakers from the Supraśl 3 site in north-eastern Poland were
used as an example for investigating. Relicts of most likely Iberian origin, were composed of quite similar, partly repetitive sets of
artifacts, of which each was quite unique. All of those deposits contained fragments of identical, very characteristic ornamented
pottery, amber artifacts, as well as stone and flint tools.
However, only some were equipped with a small amount of burnt bones or a limestone. Despite many common aspects of the
features e.g. a characteristic ritual procedure related to a specific selection of arte- and ecofacts, with the location of the site,
items deposited in Supraśl differed in many respects like category, typology, raw material, state of artifacts’ preservation and
fragmentariness of those.
In many cases a clear repeatability of those attributes could not be detected. The finds underwent numerous analyses, showing
how many circumstances have to be considered during archaeological investigation, what the consequences of omitting some
of them are and finally how the perspective is changing when applying a new methodological approach.
The stability of those explanatory factors and its implication on the archaeological proceeding have become an inspiration for
the model of ritual feature interpretation. The main purpose was to emphasize the number of factors having a significant impact
on the later conclusions, divided in two major categories: human impact and environmental conditioning, both now and in the
past.
Assuming that the Bell Beakers had a significant influence on local hunter-gatherers societies, what can be well observed on the
pottery fragments, recognition of all circumstences of those finds and their appearance are very important in the archaeological
interpretation.
