WIDENING HORIZONS AND RE-EVALUATED PRESUMPTIONS: ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES
IN THE RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH OF EARLY FARMING COMMUNITIES IN WESTERN
HUNGARY
Author(s): Oross, Krisztián (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, RCH, Institute of Archaeology) - Gortva, Gergely (Hungarian
National Museum, Archaeological Heritage Protection Directorate) - Jakucs, János (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, RCH,
Institute of Archaeology) - Lyublyanovics, Kyra (Central European University, Department of Medieval Studies) - Marton, Tibor
- Serlegi, Gábor - Vágvölgyi, Bence (Hungarian Academy of Sciences, RCH, Institute of Archaeology)
Presentation Format: Oral
Neolithic research in Hungary followed a different trajectory than in other central European regions. The lack of investigations on
extended 6th millennium cal BC Neolithic settlements in western Hungary was particularly evident. This shortcoming hindered
Hungarian scholars from creating theories and models on settlement dynamics and social organisation comparable to results
from e.g. the Merzbachtal, the Aisne valley, and Bylany. As a consequence, one had to face less canonised arguments, and the
number of useful earlier studies is also very limited. Large-scale excavations that took place prior to infrastructural developments changed the situation fundamentally, at least in terms of available assemblages. However, successful discoveries are
by no means equivalent to series of datasets suitable for complex analyses. In addition, the application of a wide range of new
scientific methods found Hungarian archaeological research in a transitory state, when it had just started to work on its backlogs
utilizing recently obtained source materials.
Bearing this legacy in mind, our contribution attempts to provide an overview of Neolithic sites from western Hungary. Both the
potentials and limitations are investigated from the perspective of building models of processes, networks, and social organisation. Our study mainly relies on architecture, settlement structures, micro-regional research, and the analyses of various types
of artefacts on the one hand. On the other hand, a special emphasis is given to recent results achieved through an increasing
adoption of methodologies from the natural sciences, especially absolute chronology and aDNA analysis. Through these efforts
we aim to gain a better understanding of flexible systems of origanisation and mobility in past societies, and to synthesise different types of datasets.
