CONTROLLING CHRONOLOGY: U-TH DATING OF SILICA SPELEOTHEMS AS A MEANS OF EVALUATING
SHORE DISPLACEMENT DATING OF ROCK PAINTINGS IN FINLAND
Author(s): Lahelma, Antti - Kailamäki, Uine (Department of Cultures, University of Helsinki)
Presentation Format: Oral
Dating prehistoric rock paintings in Finland has traditionally relied exclusively on macroscopic analysis, such as spatial association with datable residential sites or geological dating based on shore displacement. Because most of the rock painting sites
are on lakeshore cliffs, the post-glacial rebound and tilting of the Fennoscandian landmass enables a rough dating based on the
current height above water of the painted panels. The current consensus is that the oldest paintings date from ca. 5200 calBC
and the tradition gradually comes to an end around 1500 calBC. However, shore displacement dating of rock art is riddled with
uncertainties, part related to insufficient understanding of the complex hydrological history of the lake systems, part intrinsic
to the method itself.
In this paper, we examine the potentials of microscopic analysis – and specifically uranium-thorium dating – of the silica speleothems covering the art for resolving uncertainties related to macroscopic dating methods. We took samples from two rock
painting sites from different parts of the country: one from the Lake Saimaa reservoir, where cross-dating with shore displacement chronology is possible, and one from the north-eastern part of the country where geological dating methods cannot be
applied. We explore the feasibility of laser ablation mass spectrometry to make use of these sub-millimetre thick silica deposits
in archaeological samples. We also analyse the pigment itself for signs of excess uranium, thus possibly offering additional data
to incorporate in the dating process. The sample material contains both coralloid and smooth types of silica deposit. In addition
to exploring the dating of the sites, we also aim to characterize the composition of the pigment in order to distinguish anthropogenic red pigment from natural iron oxides.
