SAME SAME BUT DIFFERENT? THE LIMITS AND POSSIBILITIES OF ANALOGIES IN (GEO)ARCHAEOLOGY
Author(s): Lo Russo, Sarah (University of Basel) - Flück, Hannes (Archäologischer Dienst Graubünden)
Presentation Format: Oral
In archaeological research analogies are often used to aid interpretation, for example in the reconstruction of social models, the
interpretation of findings and sturctures or in geoarchaeological investigations.
In this paper, a case study from Roman Switzerland will be used to demonstrate that, whenever possible, these analogies should
be used as part of a multidisciplinary approach.
The legionary fortress of Vindonissa has been under archaeological investigation for more than a hundred years. However, its civil
settlement and its workshop for various handicrafts have rarely been the focus of interest. This has changed in recent years with
the archaeological analysis of eight plots with nearly 40 successively built buildings at the western border of the settlement.
Among the features was a smithy with an angular but shallow pit whose filling was finely layered. Comparable structures are
known from various roman small towns (vici) in Switzerland, and are generally considered to be slake troughs (pits filled with
water, which were used to cool and harden freshly worked iron pieces). These interpretations are usually made by referring to
other similar archaeological features.
Here we discuss the results from our multi-disciplinary investigation, which included reference to archaeological analogies, the
application of micromorphology and SEM analyses, alongside a comparison with modern analogies. Our results clearly show that
the roman pit at Vindonissa was not used as a slake trough but the microlayers were formed from trampled in material.
As a result of this work, we discuss whether it is legitimate to question the interpretation of slake trough at roman smithies. More
generally, we ask how we can use data that we have generated at the micro level for the wider interpretation of archaeological
features.
