CAN AGENTIAL REALISM FUNCTION AS RIPOSTE TO POSITIVIST ARCHAEOLOGY?
Author(s): Miller Bonney, Emily (California State University Fullerton)
Presentation Format: Oral
The organizers of the session rightly bemoan the positivist tilt of some recent archaeological discourse at the EAA. One troubling
aspect of this trend is the dualist assumption that underlies positivist thought. In this view agency resides solely in humans who
manipulate inanimate objects and materials to achieve certain ends. Theoreticians (e,g, Latour, Ingold) have pushed back against
this hierarchical structuring of the world. Barad’s agential realism (2007) explicitly rejects privileging the human or animate, acknowledging the inherent dynamism and instability of the material world. For Barad matter is in motion and thus inherently agential. The world is always becoming; determinacy results from practice. Analysis and the array of materials or apparatuses applied
to a thing create the meaning of that instantiation. The human is part of the phenomenon that generates the discourse not a
separate entity looking down at something that represents a particular content. Identity is not fixed. Barad points to the work of
physicist Niels Bohr for the proposition that whether one concluded an electron was a wave or a particle depended on the method
of measurement. Alberti and Marshall (2014) introduced Barad’s (2007) agential realism into the archaeological discourse for
the power of her ontology, dissolving the barrier between different bodies and envisioning an ontological unity that empowers us
to interrogate the world of artefacts in quite different ways. But some feminist theorists have critiqued Barad for incompletely
eliminating a masculinist perspective. This paper revisits Barad’s argument, applying agential realism to the analysis of a group
of gynomorphic vases from Early Bronze Age Crete. The paper argues that the supposed residual masculinism is illusory and
that agential realism permits a more open-ended reading of the pots that contributes to the political thrust of archaeology and
provides a way of communicating with the broader world.
