CHIPPED STONES AS IDENTITY MARKERS FROM LATE NEOLITHIC GRAVES AT POLGÁR-CSŐSZHALOM,
HUNGARY
Author(s): Farago, Norbert - Anders, Alexandra - Csippán, Péter - Raczky, Pál (Eötvös Loránd University, Institute of Archaeological Sciences)
Presentation Format: Poster
The Late Neolithic site of Polgár-Csőszhalom is one of the most significant site complexes of the Hungarian prehistory. The
northernmost tell in the Carpathian Basin would be important in itself, but the encircling and intensively excavated horizontal
settlement makes this settlement even more interesting.
Among the many complex phenomena from this site, the 123 graves provided further information about arrowheads and human
identities. The analysis of the chipped stones coming from twenty burials has already suggested preferences in grave good
choices in accordance with sex and age. Broken blade fragments, truncated blades, and trapezes were associated exclusively
with males deceased mostly between the age of 20 and 40. On one side bioarchaeological analysis provided further information
about the active and challenging life history of these chosen persons, on another side evaluation of the archaeozoological remains from the settlement provided clues about the possible utilization of these specific pieces. Considering the chipped stone
assemblages coming from ordinary settlement features, it seems that among the 12 thousand pieces found at the horizontal
settlement trapezes are almost completely absent. Moving one step back and placing the results into a wider temporal and
spatial context, chipped stones in similar situations from various other sites could have additional information or could gain a
new perspective.
The complex approach presented here is unique in its kind with respect to the evaluation of chipped stones as grave goods from
the Neolithic of the Great Hungarian Plain.
The project is funded by a grant from the National Research, Development and Innovation Office (Grant no. K124326: Neolithic
life histories. Bioarchaeological investigations on burials of the Polgár micro region).
