THE ARCHIVE IN ARCHAEOLOGY: AUTOPOIESIS, LAW, AND INDIGENEITY
Author(s): Soderland, Hilary (Attorney at Law)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper posits the legislative archive as archaeological artifact to demonstrate how the law-making process creates a legislative archive for archaeology and, in turn, how the terms and provisions of the law not only rely upon pre-existing archives but
also actuate and perpetuate the creation of new archival data. In so doing, this paper makes visible the process by which law’s
relationship with archives is autopoietic. It also illuminates how the legislative archive is an official written repository that captures colonial narratives, modalities of identity and collective memory, as well as dynamics of power. Archives of court records,
testimonies, administrative processes, legislative histories, and the text of law itself are fundamental to how law regulates the
archaeological record and positions the rights of indigenous peoples in the United States. Archives factor into claims of repatriation, requirements of standing, disposition decisions, judicial rulings, administrative decision-making, and more – reaching far
beyond the archive created by excavation alone.
Emphasis on the 1990 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) and implementing regulations indicates the ways in which archives are now essential to how law implements, effectuates, enforces, and arguably legitimates
the law governing archaeology – authenticating or invalidating cultural heritage claims. Examining NAGPRA also uncovers how
archaeology’s archives are infused with cultural alterities. Indigenous peoples’ rights under the law are inextricably linked to
the ways in which legislation relies upon and/or fashions archives. Moreover, archives – and law – often eclipse constructs of
intangible heritage. This paper highlights the autopoietic system whereby law creates archives, and archives reinforce law, to
underscore how knowledge production and access to the archaeological past is determined in a way that often eschews, rather
than embraces, cultural diversity and the intangibility of heritage.
