AN ARCHAEOASTRONOMICAL ANALYSIS OF THE MIDDLE BRONZE AGE ENCLOSURE BURIALS OF
BONLEZ (BELGIUM)
Author(s): Motta, Silvia - Gaspani, Adriano (I.N.A.F. Istituto Nazionale Astrofisica, Astronomical Observatory Milano) - Heller,
Frédéric (A.Wa.P. Agence Wallonne du Patrimoine)
Presentation Format: Oral
Bonlez, located in Wallonia, at the bottom of a valley, is a Middle Bronze Age site. Using the LIDAR surveying system, we obtained
detailed high-resolution maps. Ultra-high resolution aerial lasing enables a new paradigm in global exploration. Aerial imagery,
after relevant georeferencing and georectification, with its increasing resolution and precision, is becoming a useful tool in many
disciplines, among them in Archaeoastronomy and other studies of ancient civilizations; using satellite images is possible to
measure astronomical orientations of structures and sites In the site of Bonlez, LiDAR has yielded half a dozen MBA burials,
including the “ fossile directeur” one with enclosure, similar to the British and Dutch Bell barrows.
Analyzing the high resolution images we can notice the presence of many “tumulus”, which das not seem to be randomly arranged.
Afterwards, we made measurements“in situ” in autumn and winter 2017.
Subsequently an appropriate statistical study was carried out in order to infer the distribution function of the astronomical orientations with the aim to perform an appropriate archaeoastronomical analysis.
Statistical analyses of the orientations of the alignments were also carried out to determine whether or not the orientations we
had found were due to chance factors. In this paper, we discuss our methods and reveal the possibility of some intentional orientation of the structures and we propose that there could be an astronomical intent in building the burials found at Bonlez. Our
final aim is to demonstrate that there are confirmations on the intentional orientation of the mounds and that we can continue
with the appropriate surveys/excavations.
