HOLOCENE CLIMATE CHANGES AND HUMAN ADAPTATION AT TAKARKORI ROCK SHELTER (SW LIBYA):
AN ARCHAEOENTOMOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
Author(s): Pradelli, Jennifer (School of Applied Sciences, University of Huddersfield) - Mercuri, Anna (Laboratorio di Palinologia e Paleobotanica, Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia) - Vanin, Stefano (School of Applied Sciences, University of Huddersfield) - di Lernia, Savino (Dipartimento di Scienze dell’Antichità, Sapienza Università di Roma; GAES, University of Witwatrsrand, Johannesburg)
Presentation Format: Oral
The transition from hunting-gathering to food production shows distinct and different pathways worldwide. Evidence from the
Central Sahara suggests original trajectories to the onset of early herding, largely related to fluctuating climate and environmental conditions.
Thanks to the outstanding well preserved stratigraphy which covers the majority of cultural sequences from Late Acacus hunter-gatherers to Late Pastoral Neolithic herders (ca. 10,200 – 4300 cal yr BP), Takarkori archaeological site, located in southwest
Libya, is an enormous pool of early to middle Holocene information.
The analysis of the entomo-fauna excavated from it allowed to reconstruct the Holocene paleoclimate confirming the progressive desertification. Moreover, using an interdisciplinary approach, insects with the support of archaeobotanical analyses enable to track changes in humans’ behaviour arisen to adapt to a drier environment.
During the early phases of the Holocene (Late Acacus phases), insects strictly related to humans, from species-specific parasite to synanthropic species or species associated with human by-products confirmed the re-colonisation of the area by hunters
and gatherers. This flourishing period is probably associated with an amelioration of the climate ascertainable also by the presence of insects typical of Savannah grassland.
After these early more humid phases, the increasing of arid conditions from around 5900 years ago forced the populations to
adapt and to exploit the less numerous resources. In fact, the changes in the entomo-faunal composition suggest the increase
of animal husbandry confirmed by the remarkable rock-arts of Fezzan region depicting cattle, sheep, and goats confirming the
theory of widespread pastoralism of the area.
The work presented identifies Archaeoentomology as a powerful and effective tool to be used in archaeological context for the
interpretation of the past.
