LATE LOWER PALEOLITHIC BLADES PRODUCTION AND USE: A SUMMARY FROM ACHEULO-YABRUDIAN
QESEM CAVE, ISRAEL
Author(s): Lemorini, Cristina - Cristiani, Emanuela (Sapienza University or Rome) - Nunziante Cesaro, Stella (SMATCH, Rome) Venditti, Flavia (TAU Tel Aviv University) - Zupancich, Andrea (Sapienza University of Rome) - Barkai, Ran - Gopher, Avi (TAU Tel
Aviv University)
Presentation Format: Oral
We present an overview on blade production and use at Late Lower Peleolithic Qesem Cave (Israel) based on the integration of
technological and functional (use-wear and residues) analyses applied to lithic blades.
Qesem Cave is a Middle Pleistocene site dated to 420,000-200,000 years ago and assigned to the Acheulo-Yabrudian Cultural
Complex. Amongst the wealth of innovative behaviours, Qesem Cave yielded evidence of large scale, systematic, serial blade
production and blade tool shaping throughout the 11 meters stratigraphic sequence. The blades reflect strict standards of raw
material selection and an established and crystallized Chaîne Opératoire for blade production, shaping, use and discard. Qesem
Cave blade knappers developed a very efficient blade technology, with relatively little effort invested in core preparation and
maintenance, simple at first glance, but actually sophisticated and highly effective.
At Qesem Cave blades and naturally backed knives (NBKs) were used, in many cases, unshaped and without a haft. The principal
action carried out with these blades/tools was cutting a range of materials of soft to medium consistency. Blades and NBKs were
used especially for processing hunted prey. Nevertheless, in the area of the central (300 ky old) fireplace, although butchering is,
as always central, additional materials comprising dry hide, herbaceous plants, tubers and wood were worked by blades.
Qesem Cave blades were multi-purpose adaptable tools mostly used in cutting, butchering and defleshing activities on soft tissues and were practically in some way conceived as disposable tools – cut and throw-away implements. Blades at Qesem Cave
may thus be viewed as usable blanks accommodated for a daily “situation” rather than functionally specialized tools. In a way this
may imply expediency – at least as far as use (in dealing with prey) goes, and in this respect, no big deal, yet the technology was
not expedient at all.
