SETTLEMENT EVOLUTION BETWEEN LATE ANTIQUITY AND HIGH MIDDLE AGES UNDER ACTUAL VILLAGES : CASE STUDIES IN HAUTE-SAÔNE, EASTERN FRANCE
Author(s): Chevassu, Valentin (UMR 6249 Chrono-Environnement) - Saggese, Adrien - Chenal, Thomas (UMR 6298 ArTeHis)
Presentation Format: Oral
In this paper, we would like to adress the problem of documenting medieval settlement evolution within rural areas that are
deprived of large rescue archaeology excavations, often seen as the only way to document archaeological remains in the inner part of inhabited villages. We will present here three case studies based upon the results of a survey program launched in
2018 in several villages of Haute-Saône (Bourgogne-Franche-Comté, Eastern France). The aim of the program is to describe the
evolution of settlement between Late Antiquity and High Middle Ages in and around actual villages. The work led in these three
villages then combine studies of 19th-20th c. archaeological discoveries, analyses of medieval archives and new archaeological
field approaches.
The study area was formerly concerned by numerous archaeological researches, due to the activity of local amateurs during the
19th and the first half of the 20th centuries, or afterwards during the 1970s and 1980s. The new study of the written documentation and archaeological items left by these researches has enabled to bring numerous new pieces of information, especially
about late roman and early medieval settlement. These data have been completed and precised by the realisation of pedestrial
and geophysical surveys, and sometimes by test pits and wall archaeology, in order to relocate ancient discoveries and to bring
new chronological data.
Compared to other neighbouring sites, the first results obtained by this study lead to draw some first conclusions about settlement evolution in this area. The changes of the settlement features between classical Antiquity and early Middle Ages can be
reassessed in this area, as well as the role played by churches, priories and castles in the reshaping of the settlement during the
10th-12th centuries.
