STOP, COLLABORATE AND LISTEN: UCKONIAN PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY AS THE RUTHLESS
CONSCIENCE OF THE DISCIPLINE
Author(s): Moshenska, Gabriel (University College London, Institute of Archaeology)
Presentation Format: Oral
Fifteen years after Merriman is also 33 years after the viciously contested first World Archaeological Congress in Southampton,
UK. The figure behind the emergence of what we might call the ‘London school’ of public archaeology – Peter Ucko – was also a
driving force at the heart of this earlier event. In this contribution I will argue that the principles that drove Ucko’s public archaeology at WAC and UCL have grown and dispersed within the discipline. They form parts of the foundations for post-colonial and
anti-colonial archaeologies, for ‘social archaeology’ and for the growth and maturing of archaeological ethics. They have also
influenced museology and the field of heritage studies.
But at the same time, I argue that in this growth and expansion of influence there has been a dilution of the radical principles
and concepts that surrounded the birth of this public archaeology (and which, to be clear, were always larger and wider than the
influence of Ucko alone). In exploring this history I want to reintroduce the idea of public archaeology as the critical conscience
of archaeology – an externalists approach, to draw on the historiography of science – grounded in activism, research and praxis.
The Uckonian public archaeology that I propose is vocal, difficult, often inconvenient, frequently hostile, and dedicated to the
reshaping of archaeology into an anti-hegemonic practice.
Where I have previously explored and celebrated the breadth and variety of definitions of public archaeology, albeit from a largely
Anglophone/Global North perspective, I now want to suggest a narrowing of the discipline towards this earlier, more radical and
more focused form. This will serve to bring together currently disparate strands of debate, to amplify marginal voices, and to
strengthen and radicalise public archaeology at a time when it is needed more urgently than ever.
