JUVENILE SOCIAL AGE PHASES IN POST-MEDIEVAL FINLAND: BIOLOGICAL REALITIES, SOCIAL EXPECTATIONS, AND CULTURAL CONTEXTS
Author(s): Lipkin, Sanna (University of Oulu) - Tuovinen, Saara (University of Oulu)
Presentation Format: Oral
Between the 17th and 19th centuries being a child was rough in Finland. Life expectancy was not high and one most likely lost a
sibling or more. Northern Finnish funerary materials from five sites consists of circa 120 juvenile burials of individuals younger
than 12 years old, and provide possibilities to consider age phases, how they may be differentiated based on archaeological contexts, and how they correlate the social and cultural realities. Stillborn (at fetal stage), newborn, and infant burials, outnumber
older child burials, which is both a cultural and biological phenomenon caused by burial customs and high infant mortality rates.
Compared to burials of older children, these burials represent also a wider spectrum of practices with local variations, some of
which may be considered atypical. For instance, few newborns were hidden inside adult coffins next to feet. Nevertheless, all
burials show signs of care, and older child burials provide evidence for increased emotional attachment. The preparatory funerary
rituals consisted of carving the coffin, lining it with white textiles, making clothes for the child, and dressing the child for burial.
According to written sources, these different actions were conducted by adolescents of both genders (making) and fearless
women (dressing). Because many Finnish burials are exceptionally preserved (soft tissues, names inside coffins, intact textiles),
gender of the children may be discussed: the burials provide polarized conception of gender identities. However, some adolescent or young adult burials indicate that biological identifications of sex and cultural identifications of gender do not always
match. Foremost, the archaeologically visible choices made by the coffin makers and dressers were closely related to beliefs
and conceptions of death, and it will examined how these beliefs were reflected on the burials of Finnish juveniles of different
age phases from stillborn to adolescent.
