MOVING STONES, PEOPLE AND IDEAS: ETHNOARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDIES ON SMALL-SCALE
MOBILITY IN SUMBA, INDONESIA
Author(s): Wunderlich, Maria (Institute of Pre- and Protohistoric Archaeology, University Kiel)
Presentation Format: Oral
The identification, analysis and interpretation of mobility within prehistoric contexts must be seen as a fundamental topic which
was most probably influenced by different societal aspects, such as economic, social or ideological factors. A great help for an
understanding of potential triggers and reasons of mobility on different scales can be found within anthropological contexts.
The integration of anthropological and ethnoarchaeological data enable archaeologist to think outside the box, to gain understanding of different forms of mobility, as well as potential markers of mobility within the wide frame of material culture.
These questions will be addressed in my talk with a focus on the island of Sumba within the Indonesian archipelago. Mostly
known for the continuous erection of megalithic monuments, the case study of societies on Sumba also provide an outstanding
example of communities which are highly favorable of mobility in different forms. This includes the mobility of related individuals
between different villages for gathering and feasting events, as well as movements of ideas and symbolism. Further, short-term
mobility is strongly connected to the erection of megalithic monuments.
The example of Sumba offers insights to different driving factors of small-scale and sometimes day-to-day mobility within a
naturally restricted environment. These factors can be identified within communal and competitive spheres and are constituted by kinship-systems and cooperative needs within farming communities. The movements of people and ideas are expressed
through central gathering places, feasting activities and manifest themselves through a shared symbolism on megalithic tombs
and houses. These intensely interwoven aspects are the foundation of the connection between diverse exchange systems and
day-to-day mobility, thus being of high interest for archaeological questions.
