INVESTIGATING THE INTERACTION BETWEEN HUMAN AND NATURE IN THE MALTESE ARCHIPELAGO DURING LATE PREHISTORY
Author(s): Recchia, Giulia (Sapienza University of Rome) - De Grossi Mazzorin, Jacopo - Fiorentino, Girolamo (University of Salento)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Maltese archipelago is a key-case study in Mediterranean Prehistory (and more generally in Mediterranean Archaeology).
Since their first Neolithic occupation in the 5th millennium BC, Malta and Gozo have been fully included in the Mediterranean cultural scenario. Relationships with Sicily and maritime interconnections in general changed through time, with times of seclusion
and periods of opening. Major archaeological questions are the environmental sustainability of these islands through time and to
what extent Maltese prehistoric communities needed external contacts in order to obtain resources and raw materials. As focus
of research the Temple period has attracted much attention, while other periods (especially the Bronze Age) have been somehow
neglected till recent times. One of the most controversial points is the end of the Temple period and the transition to the Early
Bronze Age. Was the exhaustion of environmental resources a cause for the collapse of the Temple culture? Or rather, were
socio-ideological factors mainly responsible for this phenomenon? Was there a break in the occupation of the islands following
the collapse of the Temple culture?
Recent research projects in the Maltese islands have sought to address these questions and more generally to advance the
knowledge on the availability of environmental resources and specific economic choices made by the Maltese community during
late Prehistory. Case studies, approaches and methodologies have differed, but this is beneficial for both the reconstruction of
past socio-economic dynamics and the enhancement of the scholarly debate.
In this presentation we will give a synthetic overview of recent strategies of research and discuss fresh data from the long-life
sanctuary of Tas-Silġ in Malta.
