Author(s): Saito, Yukiko (University of Liverpool; Kyoto Seika University)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper aims to elucidate how colour, more precisely brightness of hue, influenced the ancients’ lives, especially focusing
on πορφύρεος in Homer. I employ a new research angle, colour-related exploration with cognitive reading, which characterizes my on-going project. Colour as perceived inside a dwelling is vitally important because the light or brightness of hue has
a substantial effect on our daily life. So too in antiquity. Light itself connotes hope but can also be alarming, since light and
darkness (i.e., light and its absence) are two sides of the same coin. Byzantine rulers, including Constantine VII, who was born
in a resplendent purple marble bedchamber, were nicknamed Πορφυρογέννητος , “the Purple-born” (Jenson 1963: 116; Finlay
2014: 28). Πορφύρεος , usually rendered as ‘purple,’ is a controversial term but doubtlessly functioned as a highly-regarded indicator in ancient society, as in the case of Tyrian purple (St. Clair, 2016: 159-64). Achilleus has his guests sit on couches and
purple rugs (τάπησί τε πορφυρέοισιν; Il. 9. 200). Purple robes are used to cover Hektor’s dead body (πορφυρέοις πέπλοισι ; Il.
24. 796). Splendid purple coverlets adorn the backs of chairs (ῥήγεα … / πορφύρεα; Od. 10. 352-3). Targeting ταπής and ῥῆγος
(‘carpet,’ ‘rug,’ etc) along with πορφύρεος in this paper, I examine how they are associated with each other, while investigating
πορφύρεος’ metaphorical, transformed representation, then discuss the fundamental effect upon the context that purple or its
radiant colour-hue implies, including references to the technical process used to produce πορφύρεος (Sterman (2012); Sassi
(2017) etc). My final goal is to unveil the poet’s aesthetic skill in composing his story, arranging bright purple hues within interior
space, conveying not only a dazzling visual effect but also the deeply sacred nature of πορφύρεος , then to unfold the part of the
realisation of ancient colour-sense.
