BACK TO THE GROUND FLOOR – DETECTABLE SOCIAL ENTITIES AT THE COPPER AGE SITE IN
RÁKÓCZIFALVA (HUNGARY)
Author(s): Szilágyi, Márton (Hamburg University) - Faragó, Norbert - Siklósi, Zsuzsanna (Eötvös Loránd University, Institute of
Archaeological Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
The newest theories about the concept of the „archaeological culture” got into the focus of attention of the Hungarian and Central European archaeological research concerning the Early and Middle Copper Age (ECA-MCA). The theoretic questions within
the debate about archaeological culture occurred in practice during the reconsideration of the formerly accepted typo-chronological model of this period.
The triggering event of the remodelling process of this period was the excavation of a complex Copper Age site (Rákóczifalva-Bivaly-tó Site 1/c) on the Great Hungarian Plain. Here, a complete cemetery of 79 graves and a whole settlement was uncovered,
which were separated by a 100-120 m wide empty zone. Further two contemporary Copper Age sites were unearthed within a
few kilometres away.
The traditional typo-chronological system fell to peaces due to the AMS-dates from the Rákóczifalva cemetery and other ECAMCA sites. Thus, the model based on the consecutive phases of the ECA Tiszapolgár culture (formerly 4500-4000 cal BC) and
the MCA Bodrogkeresztúr culture (formerly 4000-3600 cal BC) could not be maintained anymore. The new situation, in which
these two cultures had a significant chronological overlap in the second half of the 5th millennium cal BC, required not only a new
model, but also a new theoretical approach. It also became obvious, that the „top-down” perspective did not work.
It was the reason why we tried to build a new, bottom-up model of the Rákóczifalva site and its microregion without taking the
prior cultural models into consideration. We took social entities that can be recognised in the archaeological record, as a basis.
Due to the variegation of the finds, we could approach the problem from different theoretical and practical perspectives. In
our presentation, we would like to show the detectable social units and entities, social relations and borders within the settlement-cemetery-microregion triangle of Rákóczifalva.
