EAA-SAA SPONSORED SESSION: FOSTERING TRANSATLANTIC LINKS TO STRENGTHEN THE PROFESSION AND RELEVANCE OF ARCHAEOLOGY
Theme: Archaeological theory and methods beyond paradigms
Organisers: Criado-Boado, Felipe (EAA President) - Watkins, Joe (SAA President)
Format: Discussion session
SAA and EAA cooperate regularly in different activities to promote the benefit of their members and of the archaeological community as a whole. For several years they have been creating joint spaces of interaction and dialogue. Now they have decided to
go a step further in this collaboration, organizing ”sponsored sessions” in the annual conferences of both organizations labelled
by the two associations jointly.
This session is the first of what we hope will be a long and fruitful trajectory of future joint sessions. To open this series, the first
session will be organized and chaired by the two current presidents together. The theme that we propose to our members this
time is using the EAA + SAA platform to solve the great challenges that our profession faces and contribute to the solution of
the great problems that Humankind confronts nowadays. We invite our members to submit proposals for contributions on how
to take advantage of the SAA-EAA capacities to strengthen mutual collaborations and propose joint actions. We especially look
forward to receive proposals that cover all the thematic variety that our associations cover: research, heritage, management,
professionalism, policies, stewardship, working and life conditions of Archaeologists, the public, citizenship, and so forth. Future
sponsored sessions will be organized by other members in collaboration with the presidents.
The European Association of Archaeologists (EAA) and the Society for American Archaeology (SAA) are membership-based international associations dedicated to research, interpretation, and the protection of archaeological heritage. Both associations
promote the development of collaborative and interdisciplinary research, the management and interpretation of archaeological
heritage, the advancement of archaeological practices and profession, and the exchange of archaeological information, debate
and dialog. They together represent an important sample of the world archaeological community, with a combined total of over
10,000 members from around the world.
