COLLABORATION IS CORE: HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT SCOTLAND’S APPROACH TO CLIMATE CHANGE
IMPACTS, RISK AND ADAPTATION
Author(s): Davies, Mairi (HES Historic Environment Scotland)
Presentation Format: Oral
As a large public body, Historic Environment Scotland (HES) has duties under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 that require it to provide leadership and act as an exemplar, by contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and acting sustainably. The UK Climate Change Risk Assessment identifies a range of risks and opportunities that climate change may present.
Many of these have the potential to impact on the historic environment. HES is key to the delivery of Climate Ready Scotland:
Scottish Climate Change Adaptation Programme and Our Place in Time: the Historic Environment Strategy for Scotland, which
identifies climate change as a key challenge for the sector. These obligations are reflected in our Corporate Plan (2016) and
Asset Management Plan and Investment Plan (both 2018) as well as our Annual Operating Plan.
Our approach to climate change impacts, risk and adaptation of the historic environment has been shaped by working in partnership with other organisations. Our grants support external projects and programmes, including mobilizing citizen scientsts
to record vulnerable archaeological and historic sites. By working collaboratively, we have been able to ensure the historic environment is fully considered in pioneering projects such as Climate Ready Places, Dynamic Coast: Scotland’s National Coastal
Change Assessment and Edinburgh Adapts. On our own Estate, we have collaborated with the British Geological Survey and the
Scottish Environment Protection Agency to collate datasets detailing current risk from natural hazards such as flooding and
coastal erosion and have used these as indicators of susceptibility to climate change. This informs development, conservation
and maintenance, increasing the inherent resilience of our estate to cope with the changing climate, helping to safeguard it for
future generations.
