200 YEARS AFTER NAPOLEON: RÄTSEL, ÉNIGMES, AND CONUNDRUMS OF AN INTERNATIONAL STUDY
ON THE COMMEMORATIONS OF THE NAPOLEONIC WARS
Author(s): Nienhaus, Luisa (UCL Institute of Archaeology)
Presentation Format: Oral
Between 1803 and 1815, Europe was at war: to this day, the Napoleonic Wars divide and unite people and nations. The provision
of long-term peace for Europe was at the heart of the Congress of Vienna, a legacy on which the European Union has been built.
This paper takes an interdisciplinary multi-methodological approach to investigate how visitors’ national and European identity
influence the way in which they perceive sites associated with the commemoration of the Napoleonic Wars.
Visual and discourse analysis of images, monuments and memorials as well as historical and contemporary documents are important sources for this study. However, this paper will critically engage with methods applied for on-site data collection in 2016
and 2017, such as visitor observations and questionnaires, along with the statistical analyses of 2000 data-sets.
In 2016, two questionnaires, were trialled at three selected sites: Mémorial 1815 (Belgium), Völkerschlachtdenkmal (Germany)
and the National Museum of the Royal Navy (United Kingdom) (n=600). The collected data highlighted a significant underrepresentation of French nationals in the sample, which in the study’s context was a substantial issue in need to be resolved. Thus,
the Musée de l’Armée in France was included, capturing a French perspective.
Drawing on the analysed data from 2016, a new questionnaire was developed and used at all four sites in 2017 (n=1400). The
data demonstrate that, Europe’s more recent conflicts not only influence different nations’ perception of World War commemorations but also of the Napoleonic Wars. Euroscepticism, Brexit and the rise of the far right, are current trends which, to a degree,
are represented within the data.
This international study presented various conundrums which were of human as well as methodological nature. However, the
biggest conundrum was to develop an approach and questionnaire which would enable a comparative study between four very
different heritage sites.
