THE EFFECT OF PATINATION ON THE PRESERVATION OF USE-WEAR TRACES: PRELIMINARY
EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS
Author(s): Halbrucker, Éva (Department of Archaeology, Ghent University) - Fiers, Géraldine (Pore-scale Processes in Geomaterials Research Group - PProGRess/UGCT, Department of Geology, Ghent University) - Messiaen, Liesbeth - Vandendriessche,
Hans (Department of Archaeology, Ghent University) - De Kock, Tim - Cnudde, Veerle (Pore-scale Processes in Geomaterials
Research Group - PProGRess/UGCT, Department of Geology, Ghent University) - Crombé, Philippe (Department of Archaeology, Ghent University)
Presentation Format: Oral
While use-wear analysis has become a standard method to identify tool functions in the past, an important challenge this approach still faces resides in the assessment of the effect of post-depositional alterations on the preservation of use-wear. In the
case of Palaeolithic and Mesolithic stone tools, one of the most present alteration types is patination. Patination can take on a
multitude of forms and colours and can, for example, be glossy, white, or blueish. They all refer to different kinds of chemical and
structural changes occurring in the raw material.
In the research practice, patinated pieces are often discarded from the use-wear analysis, which might cause a research bias in
interpreting tool-kits and activities. This problem is recognised by many other research groups as lately, an increasing number of
projects focuses on similar research questions (Caux et al., 2018, Glauberman and Thorson, 2012, Burroni et al., 2002).
On the lithic artefacts, dating to the Final Palaeolithic and Mesolithic, within our research area, the Scheldt Basin (BE), we predominantly encounter white or blueish patinas and less frequently glossy patination. Two methods are currently being tested to
reproduce these patinas, one in an alkaline environment and one in an acidic environment. Tool replicas of different types of raw
materials were used in various experiments mimicking prehistoric activities. These tools were then either put in a warm sodium
hydroxide solution (alkaline environment) or buried in soil and regularly watered with a lactic acid solution (acidic environment).
The two methods differ in many ways, i.e. aggressiveness and time duration of the experiment. Therefore, their effect on the
use-wear traces is also expected to differ. In this presentation, the first results of their impact on the preservation of experimen-
