AN ARCHAEOLOGIST’S COMMENTS ON EUROPEAN PREHISTORIC SKY ROLE INVESTIGATION
METHODOLOGIES
Author(s): Pasztor, Emilia (Türr István Museum, Baja; Research team ‘Investigation of prehistoric earthworks in Zala county’)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeoastronomy has several definitions but they all involve the ancient cultural environment. Therefore, its thorough understanding is essential for such research. Since we explore the astronomical knowledge of ancient cultures through tangible remains, we should then give priority to archaeological approach in evaluating data.
Archaeoastronomy is a discipline in which cooperation between astronomy and archaeology is inevitable. An astronomer does
not have thorough and profound knowledge about the cultural environment of the artefact or archaeological feature to be examined. At the same time an archaeologist fails to notice valuable information because of his ”astronomical” ignorance.
Therefore, the lack of real cooperation may result either in assumptions about the high degree of astronomical knowledge of
some prehistoric cultural groups, or rigid refusal of any astronomical knowledge.
As an archaeologist and a dedicated and consistent promoter of archaeoastronomy, the author has been studying European
prehistoric sky lore for decades and reviewing relevant research papers. She wants to share her experience, and thus she introduces several types of archeoastronomy case studies in her presentation which lack sufficient consideration for cultural and/
or archaeological context and build up belief systems based on a single finding. She presents a collection of typical mistakes
made through the astronomical interpretation of monument orientations. In conclusion, she outlines the steps of the correct
methodological process.
At the same time, she draws attention, through relevant ethnographic examples, to the indigenous way of thinking, their relation
to nature and the important role celestial phenomena play in their worldview. All of this can be reflected in their material culture
that is the basic source of archaeology.
