TEETH AREN’T PEARLY, UNTIL YOU SMILE: DENTAL ANALYSIS FROM SIDON (LEVANT, MIDDLE BRONZE
AGE)
Author(s): Kharobi, Arwa - Stantis, Chris - Maaranen, Nina - Schutkowski, Holger (Bournemouth University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Ongoing excavations at College Site, Sidon (Lebanon) have revealed dual identities: a coastal city with heavy reliance on the
extensive hinterlands, and a nexus of far-reaching trade with major ritual centers.
This research explores oral health indicators, dental morphology, and stable isotopes data to identify differences between the
people interred in different burial complexes (i.e. simple graves, stone-lined graves, brick-lined graves and jar burials) of the various phases of Middle Bronze Age (c. 2000–1600 BCE) in Sidon.
The data, produced from a total of 113 skeletons, were compared within, as well as between, the contexts. Most differences
emerged when comparing the prevalence rates of dental diseases and other oral health indicators (i.e. dental attrition, caries,
periodontal disease, ante-mortem tooth loss, and calculus deposits) in males and females between the contexts. While mobility
isotopes show homogeneous values, with few exceptions, suggesting coastal residence; dietary isotopes, however, indicate
an almost total reliance on terrestrial resources despite the prevalence of fish bones in burial contexts and ritual offerings. The
nonmetric dental traits (using ASUDAS) of Sidon individuals are highly uniform overall, following rates and degrees of expression
observable across coastal Lebanese sites.
In general, favorable conditions seem to reflect the socio-politically stable climate of the time and suggest a thriving community
with well-established trade links. This dental research has generated a synthesis of bioarchaeological evidence-dental pathology and morphology, as well as stable isotopes- to investigate lived experiences in the Middle Bronze Age.
This project has received funding from the University of Bournemouth and from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme (Grant Agreement No 668640).
