THE BRONZE AND IRON AGE OCCUPATION OF THE BLAZI, NEZIRI AND KËPUTA CAVES IN THE MATI
REGION OF NORTHERN ALBANIA
Author(s): Krapf, Tobias (Swiss School of Archaeology in Greece) - Gjipali, Ilir (Institute of Archaeology, Tirana) - Gori, Maja (Ruhr
University of Bochum) - Ruka, Rudenc (Institute of Archaeology, Tirana) - Hauck, Thomas (University of Cologne)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the region of present Albania, different ecosystems were inhabited at the same time throughout prehistory. Indeed, it is not
rare to find wetland settlements, fortified hilltops and caves dwelled contemporaneously even within one bounded area like the
Korça Basin in the Southeast of the country. Recently, a complex of three well-known caves (Këputa, Blazi and Neziri) located in
the Mati district of Northern Albania, at ca. 300 masl, was made object of new excavation by the German Albanian Paleolithic
Programme (GAP). These caves, which occupy a favorable position overlooking the surrounding alluvial plain, shield several meters of archaeological deposits ranging from the Paleolithic period to the Early Iron Age, and represent an important reference
stratigraphy.
The present paper focusses on the Bronze and Iron Age layers and aims at exploring the role of the continuing use of these caves
in the later part of prehistory, when open settlements are more commonly attested. Through the study of pottery assemblages,
different activities can be observed. The presence of Early Bronze Age Cetina pottery in connection with a peculiar clay handle/
figurine (Blazi), and, in the Early Iron Age, of broken turban dish bowls spread on the floor of the Këputa cave suggest the presence of ritual activities. After the Early Iron Age the caves were only sporadically visited.
The comparison of the Bronze and Iron Age pottery from these caves in the Mati valley with contemporary assemblages from
nearby regions sheds light on possible differences between the varied types of settlements located in diverse ecosystems:
wetlands, coastal areas, mountains. In particular, the differences between the North and the South of Albania, which are geographically connected to different networks, will be outlined. Parallel developments in pottery production prove that the apparently difficult landscape characterized by mountain chains never prevented contacts and mutual exchanges.
