SHIFTING NETWORKS AND MIXING METALS IN THE EARLY DANISH BRONZE AGE: THE
ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL EVIDENCE OF METAL TRADE
Author(s): Noergaard, Heide - Vandkilde, Helle (Aarhus University, Dep. Culture and Society) - Pernicka, Ernst (Curt-Engelhorn-Zentrum für Archaeometrie, Mannheim)
Presentation Format: Oral
As early as 2100 BCE, societies in the hotspot zone of Denmark and Scania began to use metal. However, this region did not
exploit their own metal ores; therefore, the origin of the metal used is of key significance to understanding and modelling the
cross-European interconnectivities that were established through trade.
For the very first time, the Nordic region was fully dependent on one crucial exogenous resource. However, little is known about
the significance, the extent and the direction of the metal trade that kick-started the Bronze Age. Two possible transport routes
along which the metal moved to Bronze Age Scandinavia are intensively discussed. A continental route that connected the Alps,
Central Europe and the NBA can be juxtaposed with a maritime route linking Mediterranean civilisations with Atlantic communities in Northwest Europe. The archaeological and chemical evidence which support these routes cover mainly the time period
from 1600BC onwards. Before 1600BC the archaeological evidence points towards northwest and southeast Europe.
An extensive study of south Scandinavian metal artefacts between 2100-1600 BC via lead and tin-isotope analyses has uncovered the direction and extent for the earliest metal transport routes and trading networks. The chemical fingerprint combined
with the archaeological evidence highlights the significance of the metal trade for the earliest NBA societies in the North. As the
data consists of around 550 samples evenly distributed over the first 600 years of the period in which the Nordic Bronze Age
emerges, a reconstruction of the actual networks is realistic. Secondly, the comprehensive approach investigating the stylistic
characteristics of the artefacts, trace elemental compositions and lead isotope data source critically allows us to trace not just
the probable provenance of the artefacts but also identifies the mixing of ingot-like artefacts at the edge of the metal using
societies for the first time.
