CINIS SUM, CINIS TERRA EST: DECHYPERING CREMATION RITUAL IN THE ROMAN CITY OF SALACIA
(ALCÁCER DO SAL, PORTUGAL)
Author(s): Silva, Filipa (Research Centre for Anthropology and Health Department of Life Sciences, University of Coimbra)
Presentation Format: Oral
Salacia (currently Alcácer do Sal, Portugal) was one of the most important cities of the Roman Lusitania province. From one of its
funerary areas, named Azinhaga do Senhor dos Mártires, located on the west/northwest, were examined 57 cremation graves.
Those represent mainly urned secondary burials, dated from the first to the second century AD. The cremated bones and teeth
were subjected to macroscopic and metric analysis in order to gather information about the biological profile of individuals, the
cremation process and the funerary practices involved.
At least 65 individuals, one of them not cremated, corresponding to 14 non-adults, 40 adults (9 men, 12 women and 19 undetermined) and 11 of an undetermined age group were found. Regarding cremation ritual, except one case, no individuals under
six months were detected, in accordance with the customs at the time. Approximately half of the individuals were subjected to
incomplete cremations. Furthermore, no significant differences were found on burning degree by age group and sex.
The bone color, as well as the high percentage of deformation and curved transverse fractures suggest that most of the studied
individuals would be cremated during the cadaver phase, that is, shortly after death. Concerning the bone collection from the
pyre on secondary burial it was exhaustive, especially among adults. Nevertheless, the co-analysis of the characteristics of the
graves and the biological profile of individuals (age and sex) shows no significant differences in the funerary treatment given to
those individuals.
Details about the individuals and procedures involved in the cremation burials from Salacia were deciphered for the first time
through anthropological analysis, which further develops our knowledge about the Roman funerary world.
