AN UNUSUAL DOCUMENTED BURIAL OF A TEN-YEAR-OLD BOY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE END OF THE FIRST WORLD WAR
Author(s): Cvrcek, Jan (Department of Anthropology, National Museum in Prague; Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Science, Charles University) - Kaupová, Sylva (Department of Anthropology, National Museum in Prague) - Půtová, Lenka (Department of Anthropology, National Museum in Prague; Institute for History of Medicine and Foreign Languages, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University) - Velemínský, Petr (Department of Anthropology, National Museum in Prague) - Brůžek, Jaroslav (Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Science, Charles University)
Presentation Format: Poster
During the reconstruction and research of the tomb of the family of landowners from the 18th to 20th centuries in Vetlá cemetery, Czech Republic, an unusual burial of a child was also discovered. It is a ten-year-old boy (1907 – 1917), and based on historical medical records, he died in hospital of inflammation of the appendix. Even postoperative drains were found. The presence
of some skeletal non-metric traits that also occur in other family members supports his identity, the skeletal age estimation
corresponds with the known data. Stable isotopes of nitrogen and carbon were also analyzed. The boy was atypically buried in a
big double metal coffin for an adult, therefore the circumstances of the funeral were further analyzed. Both coffins were tightly
closed, the body was covered with wreaths of Buxus. The presence of the inner coffin (inset) with small window can be explained
by the hygienic regulations that were valid at that time. Its use was necessary, because the body was transported for a longer
distance. However, there are unusual differences between outer and inner coffins: 1) The inner coffin is intact, and smaller. A
short plank was found between the coffins to prevent movement of the inner coffin, so their mismatch was reflected at the
funeral. 2) There are remains of sawdust and plant residues among the coffins. 3) The outer coffin is damaged in several places,
and deformed outward. All these findings show that the outer coffin was used secondarily for this funeral. In the context of the
economically consequences of the First World War in Czech lands (e.g., lack of goods, high prices, hunger), this mode of funeral
reflects a compromise between compliance with the official regulations and the financial possibilities of the family, who is trying
to provide a dignified funeral at the time.
