MEDIEVAL MALARIA. A NEW APPROACH TO AN OLD DISEASE
Author(s): Schats, Rachel (Leiden University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Malaria is known to have had—and still has—a massive impact on health. The disease is associated with debilitating symptoms
such as fevers, muscle pains, and severe anaemia, incapacitating entire populations. Although currently absent in the Netherlands, written records indicate that the disease was endemic here from the 17th to the mid-20th century, mainly in the coastal
regions. Since the medieval environmental circumstances, with its abundance of brackish water, would have created the perfect
breeding ground for the mosquito transmitting malaria, the disease could have been a health problem of epidemic proportions.
The paucity of historical information concerning disease in this period however means that malaria is only rarely included in discussions on medieval health, hampering our interpretations of past societies. Gaining a better understanding of malaria in the
medieval period is therefore essential.
Several palaeopathological studies suggest that a skeletal indicator of anaemia, termed cribra orbitalia, can be used as a marker
for malaria in the archaeological record. Although cribra orbitalia is commonly viewed as a non-specific stress marker, there appears to be a strong correlation between this orbital pathology and malaria. However, as the presence of this pathological lesion
can only be viewed as indicative of malaria at best, a direct identification needs to be applied as well to be able to confidently
comment on past malaria presence. This paper will discuss how macroscopic research of human skeletal remains combined with
spatial analysis and a new biomolecular method will be able to shed light on past malaria spread and impact in the medieval Netherlands. In doing so, this paper will demonstrate that the combination of “old fashioned” macroscopic analysis with new types of
analyses is key for getting ahead in bioarchaeological research.
