AT THE MEETING POINT OF INFLUENCES: FINAL PALAEOLITHIC AND EARLY MESOLITHIC IN HUNGARY
Author(s): Faragó, Norbert - Mester, Zsolt - Király, Attila (Institute of Archaeological Sciences, Eötvös Loránd University) Kertész, Róbert (Damjanich János Museum) - Péntek, Attila (-) - Kraus, Dávid (Budapest Historical Museum Aquincum Museum
and Archaeological Park) - Szegedi, Kristóf István (Várkapitányság Integrált Területfejlesztési Központ Nonprofit Zrt.) - Novothny, Ágnes - Magyari, Enikő (Institute of Geography and Earth Sciences, Eötvös Loránd University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Due to its geographical context, the Middle Danube basin or Carpathian basin is a meeting point of climatic, biogeographical,
as well as cultural areas. Crossing the basin the Danube River links together the Balkans and Central Europe providing a northwest southeast migration route for animal and human populations. On the other hand, the basin is connected with the northern
and eastern plains by mountainous passes and river valleys across the Carpathians. The environmental conditions of the basin
developed under the effects of three climatic belts: oceanic from the west, continental from the east, submediterranean from
the south. The archaeological record of Hungarian sites, dated to the period of the Final Pleistocene and Early Holocene, demonstrates cultural influences coming from these directions too. We deal with this problem by ivestigating four excavated sites
representing different regions within the basin: Szekszárd-Palánk (south) and Sződliget (north) in the Danube valley, Páli-Dombok
(northwest) in the Rába valley, Jászberény (northeast) in the Zagyva valley. Szekszárd and Páli are dated to the Final Pleistocene,
Sződliget and Jászberény to the Early Holocene. The environmental context, lithic typology and technology and raw material
economy are considered using the results of new analyses as well as the revision of published analytical data.
The “Lithic resource management dynamics from the Middle Palaeolithic to the Middle Neolithic in northern Hungary” project is
financed by the NRDI Fund (grant no. K124334).
