THE LONG-FORGOTTEN OPPIDUM OF ROGGWIL, FRYBURG (CANTON OF BERN, SWITZERLAND) – A
LATE LA TÈNE CENTRE OF POWER
Author(s): Lanzicher, Andrea (Archäologischer Dienst des Kantons Bern)
Presentation Format: Oral
In 2008 the oppidum of Roggwil, Fryburg became the focus of archaeological research. The discovery of 7157 fragments of coin
pellet moulds made it clear that the site was an important Late La Tène settlement. The Archaeological Service of the Canton of
Bern is currently studying the output of a 10-year-long survey.
For thousands of years, the central Swiss plateau between Lake Biel in the west and the important river confluence near Windisch/Vindonissa in the east has been a transit and trade axis. In the Late La Tène period, five central settlements lined up along
the navigable Aare at regular intervals of 20 km. These settlements include Roggwil, which, since its discovery, has filled a gap in
the eastern Helvetic settlement area – a territory Caesar described as hierarchically structured.
The fortified settlement area contains abundant building remains. So far, however, it is the finds that shed the most light on its
former function. Coin pellet moulds and several coin blanks and planchets indicate an intensive coin production. Thus, Roggwil
played a central role in the monetary economic cycle supplying its surroundings. This role can only be explained by the (direct or
indirect) presence of a strong authority.
Roggwil was also a metal-processing centre. Among thousands of finds, there are numerous yoke top pieces and middle pins
of guiding rings. Several middle pins have been identified as casting waste. Together with off-casts of drinking horn end pieces
and hundreds of unspecific casting wastes and workpieces, they prove an important local artisanry. The finished yoke components usually had enamelled heads. It can only be assumed that specialist craftsmen carried out this processing. The examples demonstrate the role central settlements played in providing specialized (metal) goods to surrounding areas to satisfy the
needs of their populations.
