HIERARCHICAL SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS AND POTTERY VARIABILITY OF LATE FORAGERS AND EARLY
HERDERS AT JEBEL SABALOKA, SUDAN
Author(s): Garcea, Elena (Department of Letters and Philosophy, University of Cassino and Southern Latium) - Varadzinová,
Lenka (Czech Institute of Egyptology, Faculty of Arts, Charles University, Prague) - Varadzin, Ladislav (Institute of Archaeology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague) - Ambrose, Stanley (Department of Anthropology, College of Liberal Arts and
Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign, Urbana)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper presents the results of new surveys with test excavations and an analysis of variability of pottery productions. It will
provides evidence for spatial and temporal relations between task sites, minor settlements and the core sites of Sphinx and Fox
Hill. It also offers new dating and interpretation of the settlement systems by late foragers and early herders. Finally, the large
pottery assemblages from Jebel Sabaloka may contribute to building a solid bridge between the Near East and Northeastern
Africa.
Repeated surveys in the western part of the Jebel Sabaloka and in the surroundings of the Sixth Nile Cataract, in central Sudan,
have brought to light some thirty sites occupied by late foragers (Mesolithic, Early Khartoum) and early herders (Shaheinab Neolithic). The sites differ in size, depth of deposits, finds and primary activities. They could be classified according to a three-level
hierarchy, consisting of task sites, minor settlements, and core occupation sites. Sphinx (SBK.W-60) is core site that preserves
more than one meter of anthropic sediments. Its chronology anticipated the emergence of the Early Khartoum complex to the
beginning of the ninth millennium BC. Abundant impressed and incised pottery is present from the lowest levels, confirming that
systematic pottery production in Northeastern Africa dates from the late tenth/early ninth millennium BC, as observed in the
Egyptian Western Desert.
The decorated pottery from Northeastern Africa offers hints on the origin of pottery in the Near East: impressed sherds are
found in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic C in Turkey, dating to beginning of the seventh millennium BC. They are totally different from
local Pottery Neolithic ceramics and were thought to have a western, Mediterranean, origin. However, impressed pottery is about
two-thousand years older in Northeast Africa. Therefore, impressed pottery in the Near East might originate from Northeastern
Africa.
