TRANSITION FROM ZEA MAYS TO TRITICUM IN NORTH AMERICA: THE ROLE OF SPANISH
MISSIONARIES
Author(s): Scott Cummings, Linda (PaleoResearch Institute)
Presentation Format: Oral
Colonization of Central and North America required Spanish missionaries to not only build missions, but also grow wheat necessary for the bread of the Eucharist. Historical documents for California missions contain no mention of threshing sledge use,
but since threshing sledges were commonly used in Spain and other countries bounding the Mediterranean, it is likely that the
technology was imported by missionaries seeking to build missions to convert inhabitants of the New World. The existing record
for threshing sledge use in the Mediterranean region extends back at least 8,000 years and can be found in the archaeological
record via a combination of the lithic technology and phytolith evidence. In the New World, threshing floors are evident at several
missions, but there is a lack of direct evidence for threshing sledges. Seeking to document the transfer of threshing sledges
by Spanish missionaries, I first looked at adobe from a mission in California, where I recovered cut phytoliths. Adobe from the
walls of a Spanish mission in New Mexico also yielded evidence of cutting, both as phytoliths and also on straws with cut marks
retrieved from the adobe. Recovery of cut phytoliths indicates the success in transferring threshing technology to a new population. While typical Mediterranean evidence for threshing indicates chopping straw into extremely tiny pieces for later use
as animal fodder and in mud brick, evidence from the New World varies indicating very fine chopping in California to very coarse
chopping in New Mexico. This difference addresses the successes and challenges of transitioning from well known Zea mays
(maize) cultivation and processing to Triticum (wheat) cultivation and processing. Maintaining standards appears to have been
more difficult in New Mexico, suggesting other challenges in a transition not only from Zea mays to Triticum, but also socially.
