A TRANSATLANTIC PROFESSION
Author(s): Hinton, Peter (Chartered Institute for Archaeologists)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper reports on a particular type of transatlantic alliance, between two professional associations managing the largest
registers of professional archaeologists in Europe and the Americas.
The Register of Professional Archaeologists (RPA) is based in the United States. It is a listing of archaeologists who have agreed
to abide by an explicit Code of Conduct and Standards of Research Performance. RPAs agree to being held accountable for their
professional behaviour though a formal grievance procedure. The establishment and acceptance of universal standards in archaeology is the fundamental goal of the Register. To achieve this goal, the Register and its sponsoring and affiliated organizations are working to encourage registration. They are also working to obtain the endorsement of the Register by other national,
regional, and local organizations, as well as by organizations that serve a review, referral, or granting function.
The Chartered Institute for Archaeologists (CIfA) is the leading professional association representing archaeologists working
in Europe and further afield. CIfA promotes high professional standards and strong ethics in archaeological practice, to maximise the benefits that archaeologists bring to society. Accredited CIfA professionals have demonstrated technical and ethical
competence in archaeology by means of an examined portfolio of work in whichever areas of archaeology they work. They have
agreed to comply with the CIfA Code of conduct and CIfA Standards and guidance: the Code and Standards identify outcomes
and processes expected of many types of archaeological work. CIfA professionals act impartially, and are accountable under
professional conduct procedures. CIfA also maintains a register of organisations, similarly accountable.
In 2017 the two organisations entered a Memorandum of Understanding, and are collaborating on the provision of ethical resources for archaeologists, the development of archaeological skills and other initiatives. This paper will present some of that
work.
