A MULTIDISCIPLINARY APPROACH TO INVESTIGATE A UNIQUE CREMATION CUSTOM FROM THE 7TH
MILLENNIUM AT BEISAMOUN, NORTHERN ISRAEL
Author(s): Bocquentin, Fanny (UMR 7041 du CNRS. ArScAn, Equipe Ethnologie Préhistorique - Anton, Marie (École Doctorale d’Archéologie, Université Paris 1, Panthéon-Sorbonne; Musée de l’Homme, Éco-Anthropologie et Ethnologie, CNRS, UMR
7206, Paris) - Berna, Francesco (Department of Archaeology, Simon Fraser University) - Greenberg, Harris (Department of
Archaeology, Boston University) - Hart, Thomas (Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin) - Horvitz, Liora
Kolska (National Natural History Collections, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem) - Khalaily, Hamoudi (Israel Antiquities Authority) - Lernau, Omry (National Natural History Collections, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem) - Ramsey, Monica (McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research University of Cambridge) - Rosen, Arlene (Department of Anthropology, University of Texas
at Austin)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the Levant, the renewed excavations at the well known PPNB site of Beisamoun (Upper Jordan Valley, Israel) has resulted in the
discovery of a 7th millennium occupation layer (PPNC), contemporary with the founding of Çatalhöyük. Within the habitation, but
in temporarily abandoned areas, several graves have been unearthed. They testify to a great diversity of funerary forms: primary
burials, secondary deposits, skull removal, crania plastering, and cremations. The latter are the earliest yet found in the Near
East. One cluster appears to be a cremation pit that also served as the final burial spot. This specific case, which involved a cremated young adult, who survived from a flint projectile injury to the left shoulder, will be the focus of this presentation. The right
fibula has been directly dated to 7031-6700 cal BC. Archaeothanotology, zooarchaeology, micromorphological analysis, and
phytolith identification are combined in order to explore the different stages and techniques involved in this rare event: cremation pit construction, selection of fuel, primary position of the corpse, potential associated items and funerary containers, fire
management, post-cremation gesture and structure abandonment. The origins and development of cremation practices in the
region are explored as well as their significance in terms of Northern-Southern Levantine connections during the 7th millennium.
