LOCAL COMMUNITIES AND THE RISE OF POLITIES IN THE TYNE-FORTH REGION
Author(s): Orsini, Celia (Durham University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Early medieval cemeteries have been described as central places where identities are developed, reassessed and reaffirmed.
They have been the focus point of early medieval researchers for the past two decades, notably the large cremations cemeteries thought to have a large site-catchment and to serve multiple communities. However, in areas where the size of cemeteries
is much smaller, the existence of small communities is not as easily inferred; Instead the excavation and analysis methods are
questioned. This paper aims to challenge the current framework and revisits the social organisation of the communities of the
Tyne-Forth region between the 5th-8th centuries. Working with 90 site locations and 2434 burials, this research explores how
people signalled their identity and their connection to places through their funerary practices and through the use of their surrounding landscapes. A comparative analysis of the funerary practices calls attention to the existence of highly varied practices,
showing no sign of homogeneity throughout the selected timeframe despite the spread of Christianity and it is here interpreted
as a localised expression of identity. Proximity and viewshed analysis complement the landscape study to stress the use of
natural and built features and their visibility in localised area. Finally, the apparition of larger cemeteries around the 7th century
is discussed, underlining the variability in the funerary practices within each site. Funerary arrangements are then compared and
contrasted within the studied area and those of Southern Pictland and East Yorkshire in order to characterise the populations
of the Tyne-Forth region in a wider British context. This paper argues for a social organisation in small to very small social groups
through the 5th and the end of the 6th century and highlights a change in the social organisation during the 7th century, correlated to the spread of larger political entities in the region.
