SHOULD COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY BE A STANDARD PRACTICE IN THE RESEARCH AND
DOCUMENTATION OF CREMATION URNS CONTENTS?
Author(s): Rogóz, Joanna (Institue of Archaeology, University of Rzeszów) - Truszkiewicz, Adrian (Institute of Nursing and
Health Sciences, University of Rzeszów)
Presentation Format: Oral
Cremation urns due to their special contents are not an easy object to explore. Burned fragile human bones can be densely
packed, clumped with soil. Meanwhile, the computed tomography method is still not a common practice in the documentation of
funerary urns, nor is the support in exploration and analysis of their contents.
The aim of the study was to accurately capture the contents of urns before exploration and to document it. Then the confrontation of the state of bone fragments before and after extraction from the vessel.
Several urns from south-eastern Poland were examined:
•
6, site No. 6, Dębina (Podkarpackie province), 2015, Tarnobrzeg Lusatian culture;
•
3, site No. 1, Pysznica (Podkarpackie province), 2018, Tarnobrzeg Lusatian culture;
•
2, site No. 23, Kawczyce (Świętokrzyskie province), 2018, culture is still unidentified.
Tomographic examinations of the urns were performed at the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Rzeszów. Urn research
from Pysznica and Kawczyce was carried out as part of the departmental project No. IA-22/2018/508: „Multifaceted urn and
bones examination using advanced research methods”. Bearing in mind what the tomograms present, careful bone extraction
was initiated and then the bones were subjected to macroscopic anthropological analysis. Thanks to this procedure, we know
that many small pieces belonged to larger bone fragments.
The tomograms show the state of the bones inside the urn, although not always clearly legible. Undoubtedly, however, they are
an excellent method of documenting this kind of burials. Knowledge of the content of the vessel before its exploration allows
you to carry out this process more effectively. The analysis of tomograms and the method of exploration have an influence on
the conclusion not only about the actual size of bone fragments placed in the urns, but also about their belonging to a given part
of the skeleton.
