HUMAN-ENVIRONMENTAL INTERACTIONS IN NEOLITHIC LACUSTRINE LANDSCAPES: MULTIDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH OF THE SERTEYA II SITE (W RUSSIA)
Author(s): Dolbunova, Ekaterina (The State Hermitage Museum; The British Museum) - Mazurkevich, Andrey (The State Hermitage Museum) - Kittel, Piotr (Lodz University) - Maigrot, Yolaine (UMR 8215 Trajectoires, CNRS) - Kazakov, Eduard (Nansen
centre) - Gauthier, Emilie (Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comté) - Wieckowska-Lüth, Magda (Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu
Kiel) - Danger, Maxime (University Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne) - Bernard, Vincent (UMR 6566 du CNRS)
Presentation Format: Oral
The lacustrine landscape within the contemporary Serteyka River valley (a tributary of the Western Dvina) was formed after the
recession of the Weichselian (Valdai) Ice Sheet. It was earlier occupied by a few lake basins, which shores were settled from the
8th mill BC. In order to reconstruct human-environmental relationships and the history of local environmental changes, multi-disciplinary researches were conducted on the Serteya II site.
The Mesolithic and Neolithic cultural layers dated from the 8th to 3rd mill BC were found within lacustrine deposits – mostly coarse-detritus gyttja. Mesolithic and Neolithic settlements functioned here during regression phases of the palaeolakes.
The archaeological context suggests the presence of short-term episodes of lake regressions (ex. ca. 4400-4200 BP), allowing
the pile-dwelling settlement’s development on a post-lake plain. The wooden constructions were situated on the shore of a
deep-water post-lake basin, with a remote household zone documented within coarse detritus gyttja layer. Gyttja is underlain
by silty-sandy deposits with redeposited Early Neolithic (7–6th mill BC) potsherds. It demonstrates intense transgression in the
Mid-Holocene. Also finds dated to the 5th-4th mill BC bearing traces of steppe cultures’ influence have been recently revealed.
Bones of three human skeletons dated to the first half of the 3rd mill BC, were found deposited at the surface formed by lacustrine sediments and covered with trees’ branches. Rich ecofacts found at the site document exploitation of diverse landscapes,
mostly lacustrine as well as river, forests, forested wet areas and glaciofluvial or morainic uplands.
Through the millennia, the region attracted bearers of different cultural traditions through established networks or as terra incognita with rich natural resources of lacustrine landscapes located in the proximity of the Western Dvina River. It was highly
influenced by transgression-regression stages; local environmental changes were triggered both by natural and anthropogenic
factors.
