YOU ARE WHAT YOU EAT: ISOTOPIC MIXING MODELS APPLIED TO DATA FROM NEOLITHIC EUROPE
Author(s): Sebald, Sidney (Ludwig Maximilian University) - Papathanasiou, Anastasia (Greek Ministry of Culture) - Richards,
Michael (Simon Fraser University) - Grupe, Gisela (Ludwig Maximilian University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Collagen stable isotopes (delta13C, delta15N) in archaeological human bones are commonly used to assess the trophic level
(delta15N) and the vegetal food source (C3-plants vs. C4-plants, marine vs. terrestrial; delta13C). The results of isotopic analysis are usually interpreted by bivariate plots and univariate statistics. However, an isotopic sourcing reveals much more information about the biomass contribution of selected food sources.
Since it is assumed that the Neolithic Transition was accompanied by dietary change, stable isotopic ratios of human and animal
bones from Neolithic sites are especially attractive for an in-depth diet reconstruction. Indeed, the Neolithic was a time of extensive transformation. The Neolithic Transition started in the Fertile Crescent and came to Europe at around 6800 BC, starting
in Greece and from there on expanding to the Balkan. Previously published isotopic data were re-interpreted by use of concentration-dependent mixing models provided by IsoConc and SISUS.
For the reconstruction of palaeodiet, the Neolithic Greek sites Alepotrypa, Franchthi, Mavropigi, Theopetra and Xirolimni and the
Meso/Neolithic Serbian sites Lepinski Vir and Vlasac were examined. These sites are characterized by different environmental
parameters, leading to different resources. While Greece with its Mediterranean climate and environment provides a C3-plant
based diet augmented by animal protein like meat and marine fish, the Serbian sites have access to the Danube and exploited
freshwater resources.
While the largely freshwater diet of the humans from the Serbian sites was confirmed, new staples became visible in the later
Greek populations indicative of changing subsistence economies.
