EARLY NEOLITHIC LANDSCAPE BURNING IN THE BARCELONA PLAIN
Author(s): Pena Pérez, Ana (University of Barcelona) - Riera Mora, Santiago (University of Barcelona; Seminari d’Estudis i Recerques Prehistòriques - SERP)
Presentation Format: Poster
Land use practices played a fundamental part in Neolithic societies, allowing them to resourcefully exploit the environment.
Archaeological records provide us with plenty of information regarding the extent of human occupations and allow us to sense
their economic strategies. However, off-site dynamics, which include most part of Neolithic economic activities, are more difficult to assess. To open up the evidence scope, as archaeologists, we usually rely on paleo-environmental records to reconstruct
human-environment interactions and help us infer on land use practices.
Sedimentary records hold different types of paleo-environmental evidences, one of them being charcoal particles generated
by burning episodes. Evidence of landscape burning has been attested in Europe from the Mesolithic onwards. Fire was used in
forest clearance and vegetation management by prehistoric societies. We ought to think that Neolithic farming and husbandry
took many forms and that fire was involved in land management in varying degrees across the continent.
In this study we present the microcharcoal analysis of a sediment core from the northeast Barcelona Plain, dated between the
6th and 5th millennium cal BC. A high resolution analysis has allowed us to reconstruct the local fire history of a very specific period in time, when early Neolithic sites are well attested in the vicinity. This fire history reconstruction also reveals the existence of
anthropogenic fires during the two hundred years prior to the first known Neolithic occupations in the Barcelona Plain. Hopefully,
this results contribute to a larger corpus of land use evidences among Neolithic communities and help us understand the impact
that Neolithic economic activities had on the landscape.
