DENDROARCHEOLOGY OF THE ROYA’S VALLEY (FRENCH ALPS) : SUBALPINE CONSTRUCTION, TIMBER
AND FORESTS DURING THE SECOND MILLENIUM OF OUR ERA
Author(s): Labbas, Vincent (TRACES UMR 5608, University of Toulouse)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper aims to bring new knowledge on a subalpine territory, the Roya small valley, in the Southern Alps in the long term, specifically since the Middle Ages. This little territory is located between 1400 and 2800 meters in the Mercantour massif.
Timber is widely used in agropastoral buildings. Therefore, the main approaches in this case are dendrochronology and archaeology. The dialogue between them delivers a new look at the medieval and modern habitat in the mountains.
The main question is the chronology of subalpine constructions, mainly agropastoral barns but also houses. The question of
construction practices is also at the heart of this research. The last question raised by this study is the link between human
populations and forests.
Dendroarchaeological records deliver a long tree-rings chronology from the end of 10th century to early 20th century. They also
give evidence of an elevated frame of which the oldest still preserved witnesses are dated from the 13th century. This research
also reveals construction practices based on the systematic reuse of timber over a long period. The last result informs that if one
sees heterogeneous forest landscape trajectories according to the different areas of the valley, one sees a gradual decrease in
the age of the trees slaughtered over time (13th – 20th century).
Bioarchaeological informations also provide results on the mobility of raw materials for buildings. Dendrochronology also helps
to perceive different forest sources in timber used in the same building. This dendroarchaeological reading of the subalpine
construction makes it possible to question the origin of raw materials on a mountain territory at a micro-scale. This research,
that addresses the bioarchaeological angle thanks to the interannual resolution of Tree-rings, wishes to question a possible
dendro-isotopic approach to refine timber origin.
