COPPER METALLURGY IN SWITZERLAND AND BEYOND: NEW INSIGHTS INTO A COMPLEX
PHENOMENON
Author(s): van Willigen, Samuel (Swiss National Museum) - Gross, Eda (Kantonsarchäologie Zug) - Hildbrand, Erwin (Swiss
National Museum) - Nielsen, Ebbe (Kantonsarchäologie Luzern) - Reitmaier, Thomas (Archäologischer Dienst Graubünden) Schäppi, Kathrin (Kantonsarchäologie Schaffhausen) - Schaeren, Gishan (Kantonsarchäologie Zug) - Schmidt-Ott, Katharina
(Swiss National Museum) - Steinhauser-Zimmermann, Regula (Kantonsarchäologie St. Gallen) - Villa, Igor (University of Berne)
Presentation Format: Oral
In regards to early copper metallurgy, the areas north-west of the Swiss Prealps are amongst the best-documented regions of
Europe. Since the 1990s scholars have assumed that during the course of the Neolithic there were several metallurgical traditions in this region. New finds as well as a series of new analytical methods allow us now to check this hypothesis and to reassess
how these metallurgies fit into the transregional networks using a combination of various methods (typology, trace element
analysis, Pb isotope analysis). This approach has shown that, for the 4th and early 3rd millennium BCE, it is possible to distinguish
between at least three different strands of traditions that did not follow from one another. According to first trace element and
Pb isotope analyses of early 4th millennium BCE axe blades from Switzerland, pure and arsenical copper appear to be surprisingly heterogeneous. One kind of relatively pure arsenical copper is likely to originate from the Slovakian or Saxon-Bohemian Ore
Mountains, or Southeast Europe. Another group might contain Copper from alpine sources. The deposition of objects made in
this strand of tradition was discontinued around 3500 BCE.
From the late 4th millennium onwards, flanged copper axe blades and Remedello daggers found in the necropoles of the Pianura
Padana and occasionally around the Alps were made using copper that closely resembles the earlier arsenical copper. However, according to the isotopic ratios this copper stems at least partly from southern Tuscany. Influenced by these metallurgical
innovations in the South, new metallurgical hotspots in the Western Alps emerged and set the scene for further metallurgical
developments in the Swiss Plateau until the early Bronze Age.
Our analysis of 4th millennium BCE metallurgy paints a complex picture of discontinuous, possibly ephemeral innovation processes.
