STRATEGIES OF FULFILMENT OF NEEDS IN NOBLE MANORS AT ALPINE CROSSINGS FROM THE LATE
MIDDLE AGES TO THE 20TH CENTURY
Author(s): Winkelbauer, Iris (University of Vienna)
Presentation Format: Oral
The main topic of the oral contribution is going to deal with different strategies of satisfaction of needs in manors of nobility at
alpine crossings based on the interpretation of material remains (mobile and immobile objects – finds, features and built structures). A theoretical model should be introduced with the objective of answering questions of “How, why and whereby could
needs be satisfied?”, “Who was able to satisfy these needs?” and “Which dynamic processes of change in a synchronic and
diachronic dimension could be identified?” The model is based on concepts of the Chilean economist Max-Neef and the German
psychologist Heckhausen. Max-Neef understands needs as universal and limited in each society. Only the satisfiers of needs
change. A differentiation of luxury and needs is reversed and a connection between material and immaterial aspects in the shape
of satisfiers of needs can be ensured. Satisfiers of needs are gained on a micro-, meso- and macro level and they are subject to
a permanent and dynamic influence. Water, for example, is not understood as a need, but merely functions as a satisfier of the
need for subsistence. Due to a synchronic comparison of different satisfiers of needs (e.g. a simple wooden cup or a lavishly
designed prunted beaker, which serve to receive liquid), the circumstances (terminology according to Kraus) of various residents
of a noble manor can be grasped. A diachronic comparison captures an altered situation of the inhabitants due to a different
weighting of the material and immaterial aspects of a satisfier of needs. The Austrian castle of Hanfelden in Styria will function
as case study. It is located at a narrow point of the “Pölstal” valley, a junction from which not only the “Triebener Tauern” and
“Judenburg” but also “Oberzeiring” with its important silver mining could be reached.
