CAN WE BE IMPARTIAL GUARDIANS? CHALLENGES IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE INTERPRETATION
IN PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY PRACTICE
Author(s): Jameson, John H (ICOMOS ICIP)
Presentation Format: Oral
Public Archaeology is the practice of presenting archaeological data and interpretations of that data to the public. It aims to create an open, participatory and rational-critical debate in integrating public and stakeholder values into decision making processes and project outcomes. Projects labelled as “community archaeology” emphasize community engagement and power sharing.
The public interpretation of archaeology is the process of demonstrating societal relevance and communicating resource meanings and aims to enable and promote public support. Organizations such as the U.S. National Park Service, Interpret Europe, the
National Association of Interpretation, and the Association for Heritage Interpretation have been traditional leaders in public
interpretation, espousing a philosophy of interpretation that emphasizes provocation and the individualized “experience” of the
audience; the most provocative and powerful story is the one that has universal meaning. Critics of this approach point out
that it is structured to non-formal learning about significance of a place or resource that fails to address adequately the legitimacy and reality of conflicting perspectives. They maintain that heritage is not seen by everyone as a universally recognized
and shared resource, nor are its official stewards always regarded as impartial guardians. The 2008 ICOMOS Charter provided
definitions of ‘presentation’ and ‘interpretation’ as well as principles and objectives for interpretation that have been used and
applied, and to some extent redefined in the decade since, for public archaeology practice. In these philosophical rebates, who
is ‘the public’ in differing contexts? How are principles of public interpretation applied by public archaeologists in geographically
and culturally diverse settings today? Do these terms and principles have global relevance or is there a need to develop separate,
idiosyncratic, and culturally defined methodologies and approaches? What are the common denominators? How are the challenges in archaeological heritage interpretation changing the image and practice of public archaeology today?
