CREATING REUSABLE DATA: A VIEW FROM THE TRENCHES
Author(s): Austin, Anne (University of Missouri - St. Louis) - Kansa, Sarah (Alexandria Archive Institute)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeologists share an ethical obligation to publish, archive, and share their field data and research results. One expectation
of making archaeological data publicly available is its eventual reuse. Yet, research into archaeological data reuse demonstrates
that building accessible data repositories does not necessarily result in substantial reuse of archaeological data (Huggett
2018). What limitations prevent archaeological data from reuse and how can these be addressed during and after archaeological
fieldwork?
The Secret Life of Data (SLO-data) project follows the lifecycle of data from the field to the digital repository to better understand opportunities and challenges in data interpretation, publication, and reuse. We use a mixed-methods approach of interviews, field observations, and excavation data assessments to identify the challenges faced by four different archaeological
sites around the world. Our subjects are international teams comprised of senior excavation staff, students, registrars, and
specialists, all engaged with data creation, but sometimes asynchronously and with personnel changes from year to year. In this
paper, we report common findings that impeded archaeological data reuse across these four projects based on interviews and
observations conducted during the 2016-2018 field seasons. We then review how technical and organizational adjustments
that resulted from these findings impacted data creation and management practices at each site. We conclude with a discussion of how these findings can be applied to archaeological projects more broadly to better streamline data collection during
fieldwork and in the lab for project sharing and eventual reuse.
Works Cited
Huggett, J. (2018). Reuse Remix Recycle: Repurposing Archaeological Digital Data. Advances in Archaeological Practice, 6(2),
93-104. doi:10.1017/aap.2018.1
