CASTLES AND LANDSCAPES IN THE NETHERLANDS: AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE
Author(s): Schreurs, José - van Doesburg, Jan (Cultural Heritage Agency of he Netherlands)
Presentation Format: Oral
The interrelation between castles and their surroundings can be understood from two perspectives. The landscape plaid a role
in the siting, development and function of castles. On the other hand castles influenced the development of their surrounding
landscapes leading in some cases to castle or elite landscapes.
In the Netherlands we have castle landscapes in different regions. These landscapes are dotted with castles and castle sites. In
other areas castles are less dominant and plaid a minor role in development of their surroundings. But non the less they or their
remains are important historic places. The focus was until recently on the castles themselves and not so much on their environment both in castle research as in heritage management. Many main castle islands and to a lesser degree baileys are listed as
(archaeological) monuments. Elements such as gardens, parks, deer parks, ponds, farmsteads and the surrounding parcelling
systems are often not legally protected. These elements are under pressure. Space is scarce and therefore in high demand. The
maintenance of castles and estates becomes more and more expensive. Owners often see sell of parts of their property as the
solution. Castles that are connected with their environmental and original functional context are becoming rarer. The influence
of castles on the new landscape developments is reduced to historical references. The castles themselves become tourist
attractions and are used as venues for parties, wedding and fairs. There is also much interest in castles ruins and sites both
from municipalities, private developers as the public. Many castle sites are redeveloped and castle ruins consolidated or in some
cases castles rebuild.
Reconnecting castles with their cultural landscapes is not an issue in the Netherlands yet.
In the presentation we will address this topic from an cultural heritage management perspective on the basis of several examples.
