THE INFLUENCE OF AGING ON THE EXPRESSION OF SEXUALLY DIMORPHIC CRANIAL FEATURES
Author(s): Petaros, Anja (National Board of Forensic Medicine in Sweden, Linköping) - Nociarova, Dominika (Independent consultant in anthropology, Autuonomous University of Barcelona) - Wärmländer, Sebastian (Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Stockholm University; UCLA/Getty Conservation Programme, Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, UCLA)
Presentation Format: Oral
In anthropology sexing of human remains can be performed by anthroposcopic analysis of the skull where five morphological
features are scored using an ordinal scale that goes from 1 (feminine) to 5 (masculine). Different intrinsic and extrinsic factors
influence the expression of the single features, one being age. There has not been a lot of research on the effect of old age on
sexual dimorphism. The aim of this study was to compare the expression of the five traits in individuals from the Coimbra Skeletal
Identified Collection (CISC), Portugal pertaining to two age groups.
A total of 171 skulls (87 females and 84 males) divided in two age groups (25-35 yr vs >65 yr) have been analyzed and scored
using the standardized ordinal scale. All features showed statistically significant sexual dimorphism in both age groups. The
expression of the traits varied between age groups. In males, all features were more pronounced in the older age while in females
the expression of traits was less pronounced. Both sexes showed statistically significant changes in glabella score with older
individuals showing more pronounced glabellar region. The male group showed similar changes also in the occipital region. Discriminant function analysis showed better results in attesting sex in the group composed by older individuals.
The results of this study, although based on a relatively small sample that could in part be influenced by secular changes, suggest that older age could play a significant role in the expression of the five discrete cranial traits in both sexes showing a tendency in the increase of sexual dimorphism with age. Hormonal changes, longstanding influence of extrinsic factors such as
