“FATE” OF CERAMIC COLLECTIONS AFTER PRIMARY PROCESSING FOR KEEPING IN MUSEUM
Author(s): Islanova, Inna (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
Primary processing of ceramics found in settlements takes place during excavations or right off their completion. Main losses
happen that time. In general, small fragments of ceramics are found on settlements.
A new group of antiques of the 2nd – 4th centuries in the forest zone of Eastern Europe was found recently. Before that the
researcher of the settlement which became model saved all the collection and published almost all the material. Relying on this
collection it was possible to find analogous fragments of ceramics in other settlements and define the territory of a new cultural
group. New finds were unitary because the expedition leaders were specialists in other periods and archaeological cultures.
During the primary processing of collections, only ceramics of the cultures interesting those specialists were saved. Due to
presence of holistic collection the “loss” of not taken ceramics almost did not change scientific conclusions.
During the excavations of a 6th – 8th century settlement all the ceramics were saved, even small fragments. Later it was possible to establish the contacts between the population of different cultures relying on those fragments differing from common
massif.
Undoubtedly all ceramics from a general model settlement should be saved. These materials should be accessible to the researchers and published. Ceramics from secondary monuments can be not fully saved but it must be processed in detail (description, drawings, photographs, scanning). Individual forms and all materials, not characteristic for the type of antiques to
which settlement belong, must be saved.
An informed assistant must do primary processing. Special handbooks are needed, in which must be: 1) detailed characteristic
of ceramics from all known groups of antiques of the region; 2) problems of archaeological cultures studies. Also restorers of
ceramics must know the information from such a handbook, especially the existence of individual forms.
