FRONTIERS ARE NOT BORDERS
Author(s): Vannini, Guido (Università degli Studi Firenze)
Presentation Format: Oral
For a long time, frontiers have been assumed by historians, as an interpretive lens to understand cultural and identity-related aspects of the local communities. The concept of ‘frontier’ also has fascinating semantic polyvalence which apply to both spatial
and temporal dimensions, sometimes simultaneously. Time and space: the classical dimensions with which archaeologists work.
More recently, archaeologists have shown interest in this analytical ‘tool’ to further our knowledge of past societies. This attention has been encouraged by contemporary politics, the history of tomorrow. This happened for the Roman limes, with research
spanning widely from Hadrian’s Wall to the limes arabicus. For the Middle-Ages the archaeological mission of the University of
Florence ‘Medieval Petra’ has been examining the frontier re-emerged in southern Jordan from the 12th century, revealing how it
was lived by Crusaders, Ayyubids and Mamluks (between the Latin Kingdom, Syria, Egypt) in ways that are comparable to those
of other contemporaneous frontiers of the Mediterranean and very different from the previous Roman-Byzantine.
Then, there is the perception of the frontier but which also constitutes a historical fact and, both in medieval-modern times,
has produced concrete historical outcomes A change and consolidation that, in the longue durée, crosses, a Europe in which
frontiers have no borders (it is anything but a oxymoron) and fuel the construction of fluid identities. Examples range from late
medieval-modern Pomerania, to the Spains of the Reconquista, to Crusader states. Until the tragedy of the age of ‘borders’ and
of nationalisms, and the consequent ‘fossil identities’, Valmy 1792 - Sarajevo 1992. This was a parenthesis of two centuries
out of twenty (and the Roman frontiers were only external) but, until a few years ago, were perceived as ‘natural’. The hope is not
return to this historically ‘reactionary’ conception understanding of frontiers and identities.
