VIBRANT TIME. MULTIPLE TEMPORALITIES AND RHYTHMS OF CHANGE AND STABILITY IN THE
EUROPEAN UPPER PALAEOLITHIC
Author(s): Porr, Martin - Velliky, Elizabeth (University of Western Australia; Universität Tübingen)
Presentation Format: Oral
Traditionally, the concern with the oldest periods of human history is dominated by a focus on the long-term and a generalised
and averaged view of human behaviours. At the same time, it has long been recognised that Palaeolithic archaeology provides
some of the most astonishing insights into individual episodes of human actions in the deep past. Integrating these different
temporalities in a meaningful way remains a key challenge for deep time archaeology, which is also reflected in the tension between hegemonically defined periods (e.g. Magdalenian, Aurignacian, Mousterian, Acheulean etc.) and the inferred pressures of
resource and time management within evolutionary ecological interpretative frameworks.
In this paper, we want to argue that the detailed synchronic and diachronic analysis of Palaeolithic evidence allows reflecting on
the multiple temporalities during the Palaeolithic. It also allows an understanding of these deep time contexts that appears to
be much closer to historical approaches towards human agency, culture and time. We draw on recent analyses of material expressions during the Upper Palaeolithic from Southwest Germany (ca. 45k – 15k years ago). Our results demonstrate that people
during this time were entangled in multiple temporalities that neither follow the established cultural periods nor the necessities
of functional pressures and adaptation. For example, the exploitation of ochre pigments exhibits an intricate network of source
locations and patterns of selection, which were maintained throughout millennia in Central Europe. Pigment use intersected
with the social memory of populations in such a way that respective practices were maintained throughout generations despite
changes in mobility patterns and climate and environmental conditions. Similarly, the development of figurative art and related
objects exhibits rhythms that link established cultural periods in complex patterns of change and continuity that are related to
different types of social memory and the social creation of identity.
