THE SACRIFICIAL LANDSCAPE OF THE AIT ATTA NOMADS BETWEEN THE JEBEL SARHRO REGION AND
THE CENTRAL HIGH ATLAS (MOROCCO)
Author(s): Reitmaier, Thomas (Archaeological Service of the Canton of Grisons; University of Zurich, Institute for Archaeology) - Sichert, Benjamin (Integrative Prähistorische und Naturwissenschaftliche Archäologie, University of Basel)
Presentation Format: Oral
Since 2017, a new ethnoarchaeological project has been documenting one of the last families from the Ait Atta tribe, alternating
between a winter camp in the Jbel Sarhro region near the desert and rich summer pastures to the north in the central High Atlas.
The area used by these nomads between the two mountain ranges not only forms a “natural” basis for a pastoral lifestyle, but
also contains different elements of a “sacred” or ritual landscape. The nomads’ everyday lives include fulfilling their Muslim duty
of saying their prayers five times a day at specific times facing in the direction of Mecca. The ritual landscape also includes burial
places (e.g. Islamic cemeteries) where the dead are laid to rest. Important clues which may point to even earlier practices can be
found in the vicinity of the summer camp and especially on the “holy” mountain, Jbel Azourki (3700 m a.s.l.). The mountain has
numerous natural caves, one of which is located to the east of the summit and remains full of snow and ice, even in the summer
months. Once a year, the nomads still hold a sacrificial feast near this cave, ritually slaughtering various domestic animals. Finally, numerous rock-art sites dating back several centuries are located at the foot of the mountain. They can perhaps be seen
as visible evidence of earlier agreements between the Ait Atta and local settled tribes to regulate agricultural and pastoral use
(Agdal system). The nomads spend the winter months in the mountains of the Jbel Sarhro region some 350 kilometres southeast of Marrakech. This desert-like region boasts another holy mountain, Jbel Amlal, which also shapes the pastoral, sacrificial
landscape of the Ait Atta nomads.
