REVIEWING EVIDENCE FOR EARLY FARMER MIGRATION FROM SOUTHWEST ASIA TO EUROPE: AN OLD
STORY WITH A TWIST
Author(s): Brami, Maxime (Palaeogenetics Group, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz)
Presentation Format: Oral
Gabriel de Mortillet in 1879 was perhaps the first prehistorian to explicitly suggest an unbroken chain of ‘neolithic’ migration
across Southwest Asia into Europe, based on the distinctly ‘brachycephalic’ shape of Neolithic-period skulls in the Swiss
lake-dwellings and the distribution of domestic animals in Eurasia. This ‘Alpine’ man, who was thought to have originated in Central Asia, perhaps as far east as the Hindu Kush, the western slopes of the Himalayas, became the prototype of the European
Neolithic farmer – a narrative which was later rebranded and passed on to the 20th century by V. Gordon Childe through the story
of the neolithic ‘revolution’ (Childe 1936).
Fast forward eighty years and we are still searching for the great Neolithic migration across Asia, usually described as the ‘spread
of farming’ and sometimes conflated with the expansion of the Indo-Europeans. We no longer believe that European agriculture
originated in Central Asia, but all the evidence, from archaeobotany to ancient DNA and C14 dating unequivocally point to Southwest Asia as the cradle of Old World agriculture. Meanwhile, recent ancient DNA studies suggest that Central European farmers
originated in Anatolia and only marginally admixed with indigenous hunter-gatherer populations – making Neolithic migrations, if
not outright ‘massive’, at least decisive.
In line with the theme of the conference, this contribution will ask why we cannot escape the neolithic ‘revolution’ paradigm and
the story of its great migration to the west. But we will see that there is a twist. Where we might have expected Southwest Asia
to behave as a single gene pool for all Eurasian Neolithic farmers, current ancient DNA studies point to a split: Anatolian, Iranian
and South Levantine farming populations are all clearly distinguished on the PCA of genetic diversity. Suddenly the chain of migration is broken and the picture becomes complex.
