BEYOND THE PROJECT: LONG-TERM ENGAGEMENT OF INDIGENOUS GROUPS/COMMUNITIES TO
EFFECTIVELY MANAGE THE BIO-PHYSICAL, CULTURAL AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT AMIDST CLIMATE
CHANGE
Author(s): Douglas, Diane (Applied EarthWorks)
Presentation Format: Oral
Providing indigenous groups with opportunities to manage their traditional lands and resources can increase their resilience
to climate change. For several generations, many indigenous populations were forcibly relocated, had their cultural identity
stripped away, and made to adopt new land management practices. These changes often resulted in landscapes and natural
resources more depleted than under traditional land use practices. The vast changes these groups were forced to adopt often
led to social-psychological stress, conflict, and forced migration.
In recent decades, the United Nations (UN) and International Financial Institutions (IFIs) have instituted treaties and conventions
to help protect the rights of these groups. Whilst these organizations have instituted best practices to help protect these vulnerable groups (UN 2007), stakeholder engagement and consultation are often not as effective as they could be. Consultation
is generally conducted in isolation, project by project and consultants are only provided a few months to develop and implement
stakeholder engagement plans. The reality is, establishing relationships with community leaders (for women and men) takes
time. Questionnaires are not effective means of gathering information among these groups, and it can take years to establish
adequate trust before these groups will work with scientists to identify/implement best management practices suited to their
unique social/cultural landscape, as well as their natural landscape.
If UN organizations and IFIs developed a programmatic approach to consultation, wherein consultation efforts for different projects were coordinated, consultants would have adequate time to establish relationships with leaders of rural communities and
indigenous groups. Consultants could then work to create regional community networks that function cooperatively to manage
natural resources and the landscape in a manner that contributes resilience to climate change, sustain biodiversity, and maintain
cultural identity and traditional knowledge. This paper reviews social, cultural and environmental issues faced implementing the
UN REDD programme in Africa.
