FEMALE DRESS AND LOCAL CENTERS OF POWER OF THE ANCIENT AESTIANS (SAMBIAN-NATANGIAN
CULTURE) IN THE BEGINNING OF THE ROMAN PERIOD
Author(s): Khomiakova, Olga (Institute of Archaeology of RAS, Moscow)
Presentation Format: Oral
The archaeological cultures of South-East Baltic, associated with the West Balt Circle (so-called Aestii) in Roman period considered to be a part of the trans-baltic intercultural exchange system, connected with centers of power in Northern Europe and the
Southern coastland of the Baltic Sea.
The Sambian-Natangian culture (Kaliningrad region of the Russian Federation) takes a centerpiece in the West Balt circle. It’s
special conditions: access to the sea, the presence of the richest amber deposits, – determined the possibility of cultural relations with the Roman Empire, Central and Northern Europe. A significant economical and cultural center, which played a key role
in “amber trade” and interposition in spread of all kinds of innovations in the Eastern Baltic, arised here in Roman period.
Traditionally the investigations of the Sambian-Natangian’s antiquities are based on the studyes of burial rite. Issues of the
emergence of regional elites and local centers of power are also draw on the grave’s data. Along with the traditional methods, the
methods of correlation, cluster and GIS-analysis can be used.
The lecture presents a comparative analysis of the results of allocation of local centers of power using spatial analysis of cemeteries of the Sambian-Natangian culture, and their comparison with female graves data. In the beginning of the Roman period a
group of female graves, which indicates the presence of “higher” groups in Aestian society, can be distinguished. Female dress
is also regarded as one of the possible reflections of social structure. It can shed more light on a number of existing questions.
How did the Aestians form the earliest local centers of power in the Roman period? What was the nature of social structures in
the South-East Baltic? Who were they connected with? And finnaly, what place could they occupy in the social pattern of the
Baltic region?
