RETELLING THE STORY OF THE MEDIEVAL FRONTIER IN CENTRAL IBERIA: THE CULTURAL LANDSCAPE
OF THE CASTLE OF MOLINA DE ARAGÓN
Author(s): Garcia-Contreras Ruiz, Guillermo (Universidad de Granada) - Pluskowski, Aleks G. (University of Reading) - Alexander, Michelle (University of York) - Banerjea, Rowena Y. (University of Reading) - García García, Marcos (University of York;
Universidad de Granada)
Presentation Format: Oral
Molina de Aragón is famous for its dramatic castle, which began as a rural Berber fortification during the early Islamic period (8th–
10th centuries), then developed into a focal point for the defence of Al-Andalus against the expansion of Christian kingdoms
from the north (10th–11th century), and subsequently became the capital of the Taifa of Molina, following the collapse of the
Umayyad Caliphate. In 1129, Molina was conquered by King Alfonso I of Aragon and subsequently bequeathed to the Lara family,
who expanded the castle and maintained a virtually independent frontier lordship into the 14th century. As the Christian-Muslim
frontier shifted south by the start of the 13th century, the territory of Molina came to border the lands of two opposing Christian
powers to the north, east and south (Aragón) and west (Castile). Muslim communities in the territory of Molina gave way to those
established by Christian and Jewish migrants, and all three groups were represented in the town of Molina.
For many centuries then, the castle at Molina functioned as the centre of governance of a multicultural frontier landscape. This
landscape is dominated by one of the principal mountain regions in Spain, cut by the valley of the River Gallo in the Upper Tagus,
and recently designated as a UNESCO Global Geopark in recognition of its distinctive natural heritage. However, the castle and
the Geopark, as well as the broader historical frontier, are not readily connected by heritage managers or visitors. One of the main
aims of the Landscapes of (Re)Conquest project is to change how we understand iconic castles such as Molina, establishing a
methodological precedent for the future by connecting the story of the castle’s development with the transformation of its
cultural landscape, a story ultimately created by waves of Muslim, Christian and Jewish migrants.
