INTANGIBLE ARCHIVES AND ‘COLONISED NARRATIVES’
Author(s): Gallinaro, Marina (Dipartimento Scienze dell’Antichità. Sapienza Università di Roma; Cotsen Institute of Archaeology. UCLA)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the last decades the archaeological research carried out in Africa by foreign groups of research changed methods and approaches, adopting a de-colonisation and a post-decolonisation perspective aimed at a more effective collaboration with the
local community. This still far than a complete process is rapidly becoming at least a professed standard.
This paper will discuss a case study from the central Sahara (SW Libya), where any fieldwork activities have been suspended in
2011 due the so-called Arab Spring and the following political instability: this situation has complex implications with the de-colonisation process. This area is worldwide renown for the presence of rock art sites of outstanding value, some of which have
been included in the UNESCO WH List, and are actually in the endangered list. Revealed to the Western world since the mid of
XIX century, they represent an extraordinary example of a “colonised narrative”. Setting apart few cases of painted or engraved
blocks that have been exported in the past and are now in the exhibitions or in the store of Europeans museums, the heritage
is still in situ, and subject to natural and worrying anthropic threats. Since a few decades ago a distorted narrative about this
heritage has been proposed on the basis of the (often only partially correct) reproductions done by professional painters that
followed the researchers in the field. Furthermore, photographic archives are currently becoming accessible online, without any
information about the contexts, potentially generating new narratives. A new approach proposed by the ASArt-DATA project (my
MSCA Global fellowship project) will be discussed.
The present state is paradoxical: a mass of documentation and the main researchers are based in colonial countries, but the
de-colonising world is at risk. Which is the correct way to contribute to the - nevertheless ongoing- de-colonisation processes?
