STABLE ISOTOPE ANALYSES OF LATE NEOLITHIC HUMAN REMAINS FROM SWITZERLAND
Author(s): Siebke, Inga (Department of Physical Anthropology, Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Bern) - Steuri,
Noah (Department of Prehistory, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, University of Bern) - Furtwängler, Anja (Institute for
Archaeological Sciences, Archaeo- and Palaeogenetics, University of Tübingen) - Hafner, Albert (Department of Prehistory, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, University of Bern) - Ramstein, Marianne (Archaeological Service Bern) - Krause, Johannes
(Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena) - Lösch, Sandra (Department of Physical Anthropology, Institute
of Forensic Medicine, University of Bern)
Presentation Format: Oral
Stable isotope studies of human remains from the Late Neolithic of modern Switzerland are currently absent from data sets of
Central Europe. This changed with the discovery of the Dolmen from Oberbipp, which forms the basis of a project to reconstruct
nutrition and mobility during the Late Neolithic using stable isotopes (13C/12C, 15N/14N, and 34S/32S) as well as occupation
time, kinship and populationgenetics. This paper is aimed to evaluate diet with regard to sex, geographical regions, and chronological phases.
In total, 114 human skeletons from 20 different sites (Switzerland, France, and Germany) were sampled. All samples were radiocarbon dated and date from the Middle Neolithic to the Early Bronze Age. In addition, 67 contemporary faunal remains were
sampled. Collagen was extracted and its quality was assessed.
All faunal remains and 91 human samples from 14 sites provided sufficient collagen quality for subsequent statistical analyses.
The data show expected trophic levels for δ13C and δ15N. The human samples show little variation for δ13C between sites,
while δ15N and δ34S show greater variability. No differences between the sexes regarding all three elements are observed.
However, little distinction between the chronological phases are recorded.
The small variability for δ34S across the animals is indicative for a local signal and therefore suitable as baseline for the human
samples. The δ13C values indicate a C3 plant based diet across all sites, which is consistence with other contemporary sites
from Central Europe. The variability of δ15N seems to be related to the site rather than being indicative for the social status.
The sulphur values do not support the hypothesis of either patrilocal or matrilocal societies. However, the females have a larger
distribution than the males, which could be an indication towards higher female migration.
