CO-CREATING ARCHAEOLOGIES : A DOCUMENTARY PERSPECTIVE TO COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
AND REPRESENTATION
Author(s): Lupuwana, Vuyiswa (University of Cape Town)
Presentation Format: Oral
South African society came about from historical processes of segregation and disenfranchisement. A muting of indigenous
voices. It is a complex and diverse social landscape and as a result there have been calls for the discipline to be more engaged in
current socio-political issues made manifest through movements which have called for the transformation of the discipline and
an African centered curriculum.
This paper explores the prospects of an engaged archaeology as a tool that raises the profile of the marginalized through the
perspective of the wild foods co-create project that has spanned over three years. The project has worked on co-creating knowledge and livelihoods in consultation with local communities and a multidisciplinary array of researchers from the environmental
and geographical sciences, ethics practitioners and law and policy advisers.
My role in the project has been that of an archaeologist and documentary filmmaker in exploring the intersection of archaeology
and documentary as a means of representation and engagement. The documentary process has created an ethnographic archive on contemporary and historical food-way practices and represents the often-marginalized indigenous voices. The absence
of histories and representations of dominated communities continues to aid structural inequality and marginalization. We argue
here that archaeology can become a powerful tool to raise the profile of these voices and aid in the processes of representation
and restitution.
Through an inter-sectional approach, we will engage with concepts of representation and visibility and visuality to further discuss approaches on engaging meaningfully with communities through archaeology and documentary film. How does the concept of visibility and visuality from a documentary perspective give communities agency within society and empower them to
confront social justice issues?
