HORSE PROVISIONING AT IRON AGE CAN ROQUETA (SABADELL, BARCELONA). AN INSIGHT FROM
STRONTIUM ISOTOPES
Author(s): Valenzuela, Silvia (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas - IMF- ASD) - Albizuri, Silvia (Universitat de Barcelona, Departament d’Història i Arqueologia– SERP) - Bosch, Delphine (Géosciences Montpellier, UMR-5243 CNRS-Université
Montpellier) - López-Cachero, Javier (Universitat de Barcelona, Departament d’Història i Arqueologia– SERP)
Presentation Format: Oral
Metal findings and iconographic evidences related to horses suggest that these animals had a strong symbolic value and became major prestige items in Bronze Age and Iron Age societies from the NE of the Iberian Peninsula. The research developed in
the frame of the project ‘Mobility, contacts and exchanges during the Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age in the north-east of the
Iberian Peninsula: the Ripoll River (Barcelona) as a laboratory’ (PI: J. López Cachero) included a pilot study on six Iron Age horses
from the site of Can Roqueta to explore their geographical origin by the means of strontium isotopes (87Sr/86Sr).
The strontium isotopic study included the analysis of six archaeological horse enamel samples. In addition, the local strontium
ratio was assessed by the means of three dentine samples from the archaeological site, and the bioavailable strontium around
the site was evaluated on oak leaves from two different locations. In addition, other 10 present-day tree samples from different
geological formations around the site were used as a comparison. The results obtained indicate that some of the strontium
ratios from archaeological horse enamel are compatible with the local geology and neighbour formations. Nevertheless, a more
distant origin cannot be excluded, as lead isotopic studies on bronze objects recovered at the site indicate that copper ores
from the area of Les Cévennes (Southern France) were used to make a Mialhacian arrowhead and a double-spring fibula, which
supports the existence of long distance trade at the site (Rovira et al., 2008).
References:
Rovira, M. C.; Hunt, M.; Montero, I.; Rovira, S. y López Cachero, F. J. (2008): “Caracterización isotópica de bronces de la necrópolis
protohistórica de Can Piteu-Can Roqueta (Sabadell, Barcelona)”, VII Congreso Ibérico de Arqueometría (Madrid 2007), 448-457.
