BURYING CHILDREN DURING LATE IRON AGE: THE NECROPOLIS OF URVILLE-NACQUEVILLE,
NORMANDY (FRANCE), SECOND CENTURY BC
Author(s): Arzelier, Ana (De la Préhistoire à l’Actuel, Culture, Environnement, Anthropologie–UMR 5199, CNRS, Université de
Bordeaux) - Partiot, Caroline (De la Préhistoire à l’Actuel, Culture, Environnement, Anthropologie–UMR 5199, CNRS, Université
de Bordeaux) - Fischer, Claire-Elise (De la Préhistoire à l’Actuel, Culture, Environnement, Anthropologie–UMR 5199, CNRS, Université de Bordeaux) - Lefort, Anthony (Inrap Grand-Ouest) - LeRoy, Mélie (Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LAMPEA, LabexMed) - Rottier, Stéphane (De la Préhistoire à l’Actuel, Culture, Environnement, Anthropologie–UMR 5199, CNRS, Université de Bordeaux)
Presentation Format: Oral
Ten kilometers west from Cherbourg, Normandy, the shore of Urville-Nacqueville houses a major Iron Age necropolis of the second century BC. The excavations ended in 2017 and revealed more than a hundred graves, comprising of about sixty of particularly well-preserved immature individuals, from various age groups.
This site is of special importance for the understanding of funerary practices in this region and the place of juveniles in funerary
rituals. Since 2011, the necropolis is at the core of an interdisciplinary research program, confronting DNA studies, biological
characterization of the deceased and GIS.
The present work aims to assess the identity of the deceased using an osteobiographical approach on a corpus composed by 59
individuals. A second objective is to question the different treatments observed and therefore provide insight into the funerary
practices used by this coastal iron age group and the principles underlying immature funerary rituals.
Indeed, the excavations document the existence of a funerary organisation specific to immature individuals. If age-at-death
does not regulate access to the necropolis, this criterion governs the processing of the body after death. Inhumation appears
to be devoted to individuals under the age of ten years old, a limit above which the deceased experienced a different treatment,
namely cremation.
If we consider adults funerary practices to be the normative organisation, the sepulchral sphere dedicated to those under 10
years old lies outside the funerary conventions associated to usual rituals. Fire treatment appears to be restricted to “adults”,
however children funerary practices are also governed by conventions, regulating the choice of spatial and internal organisations
of the burials. The installation procedure of a burial is regulated by both the funerary functioning of the necropolis and age at
death. Thus, what transpires from the practices observed at Urville-Nacqueville is likely an evolution of status during childhood.
