RHYTHM IN THE GREAT DIONYSIAC FRESCO IN VILLA OF THE MYSTERIES, POMPEII
Author(s): Lindstrom, Torill Christine (University of Bergen)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Great Dionysiac Fresco in Villa of the Mysteries near Pompeii is one of the largest, best preserved, and most studied paintings from Roman antiquity. The Fresco has been interpreted from various perspectives, but still has many questions connected
to it.
One question is: How should it be “read”? As a contingent cycle from left to right, or from right to left? As two parallel, separate
friezes? In a criss-cross manner? Or, as consisting of ten separate scenes with little, if any, connection between them? – The
question about the Fresco’s “reading” is important because it has implications for the question whether the Fresco is a copy, or
an original composition; and can have implications for the Fresco’s overall interpretation.
Wesenberg (1997) made the observation that, in each scene, there is one person who detaches himself/herself from the group
of other persons that he/she is spatially, thematically, or activity-wise co-located with.
I took this observation further, and found that: The detached persons move away from, or look away from, or beyond, their surroundings, and always in the same direction: towards the right. I discovered that all the persons (and one animal) in the Fresco
create a distinct rhythm, a 4/4-rhythm. The person on the “fourth stroke” (with one exception) leads the spectators’ gaze towards the next scene. This rhytm is repeated in all the Fresco’s scenes, apart from scene VI which shows the divine couple.
However, this is the central scene and pivotal point of the Fresco, and differs in several aspects. – I conclude: This 4/4-rhythm
creates coherence and unity in the Fresco’s spatial structure. It supports a left-to-right “reading”; and provides a strong argument for the Fresco’s compositional originality. The rhythm may also allude to Dionysianism, where music, singing, and dancing
were important cultic components.
