THE WORDS WE USE AND THE INTERPRETATION OF THE PAST: REFLECTIONS ON THE STUDY OF RURAL
SPACES
Author(s): Stagno, Anna Maria (University of Genoa - Laboratory of Environmental Archaeology and History)
Presentation Format: Oral
The paper aims to explore the similarities and the different trajectories of two phenomena which share the same roots: the colonial perspective and the urban dominant consideration of rural areas. The colonialist divide, its idealogical background and its
consequences in the interpretation of the past societies of the colonies have been already acknowledged and the post-colonial
perspective is well established in the archaeological theory. On the contrary, what happened in the interpretation of rural areas
since the late 18th c., with the establishment of the opposition urban/rural world and the human/nature dichotomy is far to be
recognised in all its consequences for the archaeological study and interpretation of our past. The physiographic theories of the
18th c. informed that framework, as well as the rationalisation of the 19th c. and the modernisation of the 20th c. At the same
time, those theories activated the process of ‘folklorisation’ of rural societies, with the underestimation of the local environmental knowledge, the progressive annulment of the local practices of environmental resources management, and the consequent
marginalisation of mountain areas. The current ‘heritagisation’ of mountain areas, promoting their supposed wilderness and
“a-temporality” could be considered the ultimate effect of this process. To change it, archaeology is playing a key role providing a
new historical narrative on mountain areas, however there is urgency for a reflection on the origins and the ideological dimension
of many concepts and words (e.g. the opposition cultivated/uncultivated lands, private property, human impacts, etc.) which
archaeology employs to decipher the rural spaces and societies. Many of them find their codification in the 18th c. theories. The
idea is that the words we use orient our interpretation of the past, and the aim is to show that archaeology needs to decolonise
or, maybe, “de-urbanise” the study of rural areas.
