ANTHROPOGENIC PEDO-SEDIMENTARY PROCESSES IN MIDDLE AGES: FROM MICROMOPHOLOGICAL
ANALYSIS TO SOCIETAL IMPLICATION
Author(s): Borderie, Quentin (CNRS - UMR 7041 ArScAn; Service de l’archéologie préventive, département d’Eure-et-Loir) Augry, Stéphane (Institut national de recherches archéologiques préventives) - Wech, Pierre (Mission archéologique de l’Eure;
CNRS - UMR 7041 ArScAn)
Presentation Format: Oral
To answer to the question of the post classical town and to better understand the process of formation of Dark Earth, geoarchaeological investigations have been undertaken in urban environment of north of France since the beginning of the 1990s.
Thus, many towns have been investigated throughout micromophological analysis. More recently, other types of archaeological
soil archives have been explored, including pit houses, indoor spaces, fortified places, elite settlements. The preservation of
floors of indoor and outdoor spaces and the low bio-activity in such contexts allow to observe the micro-component in their
deposit position. Thus, it can be possible to propose consolidated hypothesis of use of spaces. Moreover, it can be possible to
observe other post depositional process leading to Dark Earth formation.
Since 2000s, the 5mm systematic counting on thin section and the single context method allow to get quantified data. This conducted to new methodological results such as the relation between macro records, archaeological artefacts, and chemical data.
Moreover, even if problems of chronological correspondences still exist this quantification allows to compare more easily the
results coming from different type of contexts, especially between Dark Earth environments and micro-stratified ones. At the
settlement scale, it allows to get information on the use of space and activities, on which type of refuse in which type of spaces
can be discarded. When comparing with archaeological features it allows to make correspondences and to precise hypothesis
or give new ones. Moreover, the gathering of thousands of micro-component and pedo-sedimentary environment implies to
propose new points of view to the middle ages practices and societies, especially when considering the waste management, the
floor building process and material and the agricultural activities in urban environment.
