LIVING WITH LIMINALITY ALONG THE ANGLO-WELSH BORDER: MONUMENTS, MYTHS AND MIGRATION
OVER THE LONGUE DURÉE
Author(s): Roxby-Mackey, Melanie (University of Birmingham)
Presentation Format: Oral
Protecting, researching and interpreting the Early Medieval archaeology of the Anglo-Welsh border presents both challenges and
opportunities. Offa’s Dyke in particular, over its (disputed) 132 km course crosses two countries, six local government districts
and innumerable sections of publicly and privately-owned land. It traverses a liminal environment with some serious time depth.
Through its landscape, place-name and documentary evidence this is a demonstrably different, transitional space to its neighbours from prehistory through to the present day.
This is a landscape subject to differing narratives. The vibrant local version is driven by the complexities of living in this culturally
unique space and stands in contrast to those of England and Wales, narratives that have traditionally been less concerned with
this unfashionably liminal space within the UK.
But circumstances and fashions change. Following the UK’s vote to leave the EU polls now show that the Welsh and English
West Midlands narratives on remaining or leaving are polarising. Concurrently, the Early Medieval period is becoming increasingly
co-opted into the origin myths of English right-wing politics. On the thorny subject of migration, residents on either side of the
border are less concerned with arrivals from the EU than they are with those from the prosperous English Home Counties who
they see as driving up house prices beyond their reach.
These are economically and culturally challenging times for the Offa’s Dyke Association, an independent, community-based voluntary organisation concerned with protecting and promoting the heritage of this border landscape. What are the most effective
means to maintain the integrity of the region’s archaeology, to engage with national and international audiences whilst also
ensuring relevance to local communities on both sides of the border? This paper discusses the experiences of those working in
and with the Offa’s Dyke Association in finding solutions to these complex issues.
