THE ROLE OF THE ARCADES FOR EUROPEAN BURGHERS (13TH-18TH C.)
Author(s): Glinski, Radoslaw (University od Wroclaw)
Presentation Format: Oral
In medieval European towns featured by high-density housing arouse the crying need of additional well exposed space for trade
and craft production. Therefore, the light weight wood constructions were installed to the front of the houses, protecting professional activity of their owners against weather conditions. Over time, such constructions took the form of arcardes and began
to incroach the public space, what resulted in inhibiting the praxis of their erection. Over the course of the 13th and 14th c.,
arcades spreaded over the large part of Europe, being employed also in the Early Modern times (i.a. France, Italy, Switzerland,
Germany, Bohemia, Poland). Introduction of arcades had a huge impact on towns and town dwellers, being one of the results of
urbanization, and this issue was seldom discussed by scholars. From the urban planning perspective, arcades brought changes in
communication system, development of new trade passages, influenced towns’ aesthetic landscape and imposed the need for
new regulations. Owing to arcades the town dweller gained a new half-private and half-public space. The arcades expanded the
functional programme of the burgher house, providing additional work, trade or lease space, therefore increasing its economic
potential. In addition to the new privileges, the town dwellers were also subject to new obligations connected with ensuring the
appropriate form and maintainance of the arcades, as they served also as communication routes for all burghers.
This paper aims to present the grounds and consequences of erecting and demolishing the arcades from the perspective of both
the whole town communities and individual town dwellers. It presents selected results of the project ”Silesian arcade architecture in the European context (13th-18th c.)” financed by the National Science Center (project no. 2017/25 / N / HS2 / 01161).
