“WILL WE EVER GET TO DO THIS AGAIN?” EARLY ADOLESCENTS USING ARCHAEOLOGY TO
INVESTIGATE THE LIVES OF THE WORKING POOR
Author(s): Henderson, A Gwynn (Kentucky Archaeological Survey) - Levstik, Linda (University of Kentucky)
Presentation Format: Oral
The research presented in this paper focuses on one aspect of a larger study investigating the impact of archaeological study on
fifth-seventh grade students living in four rural, high poverty communities in and adjacent to the Appalachia region of Kentucky.
Study participants included students participating in an archaeology program focused on investigating the lives of the working poor in a racially integrated neighborhood. Investigators administered pre- and post-unit surveys of student interest in and
knowledge about archaeology, history, and inquiry, observed selected class sessions and conducted small group (2-3 students)
interviews that were analyzed using a grounded theory model, searching for patterns and discrepant cases within and across
data sets.
The proposed presentation focuses specifically on students’ responses to an elicitation task that required students to select
data to include in a documentary about the community of shotgun houses that formed the basis for their study. Students had
access to archaeological data, historical documents and oral histories of the people who had lived in this neighborhood.
In grappling with the task of selecting elements of a documentary, students considered the constraints on human agency, the
impact of poverty, and the richness of lives lived amidst serious difficulties but also in close communities. In doing so, their
responses suggest affordances and constraints related to archaeology-based inquiry into civic issues—in this case issues of
eminent domain, relocation, community preservation and economic trade-offs. Interviews also make clear the challenges facing
students whose experiences may be limited as much by a lack of prior instruction using archaeological and historical evidence,
as by roadblocks related to their own economic status. Further, interviews reveal students’ insights into the human costs of
wealth and highlight the ways in which archaeological and historical study provide constructive outlets for the expression of
such insights.
