GOVERNING SERBIAN AND BOSNIAN ARCHAEOLOGY: A POST-CONFLICT COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE
Author(s): Milosavljevic, Monika (University of Belgrade, Faculty of Philosophy, Department of Archaeology)
Presentation Format: Oral
The archaeologies of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina share their same institutional roots in both the former Kingdom and
Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia. The collapse of the latter resulted in a multitude of individual archaeologies, while similar and
disparate form one another, still stemmed from one source. On these foundations, these countries’ archaeologies have been
constructed. Albeit intertwined with interpreting the past in a historical context, they are not yet liberated of the “identity” question, which is just one problematic thread of a multitude in the post-conflict context for archaeology. The limitations facing the
practice of archaeology thereof within Serbia and Bosnia Herzegovina must be investigated as to establish what pressures exist
in a political context defining the area in which archaeology is allowed to function. The issue concerning the intersection of
archaeology and politics is the aim of this presentation, in which my proposed analysis gains from a Foucauldian perspective of
governmentality and an attuned sensitivity for political post-conflict. The former can be seen as the “art of government” and the
“conduct of conduct” as well as an assemblage of forces and practices that make reality open to political or other interventions.
In Foucault’s words, these techniques are interrelated, disciplining norms and processes that govern the conduct of populations. Reflected then this concept is in the main hypothesis, wherein informal aspects of archaeological function in the Western
Balkans, remaining predominant in comparison to their legal frameworks as set against international professional standards. As
a consequence, the knowledge production created thereof results in an identity construction and treatment of respective and
mutual cultural heritages as unpredictable, leading to unscientific foundations. As such, it leads further to the degradation of
archaeology as a profession and simplification of identity constructions.
