DISTORTION AND FRAGMENTATION BEFORE WETLAND DEPOSITION, THE FINAL TRANSITION OF IRON
AGE OBJECTS
Author(s): Treadway, Tiffany (Cardiff University, SHARE)
Presentation Format: Poster
Iron Age objects found within wetland contexts in Britain are notorious for their altered state before deposition. In comparison
to the preceding Bronze Age and proceeding Roman period, Iron Age objects found within a wetland context have the highest
percentage of purposeful fragmentation and distortion of objects. This alteration of state has been explained by many as a
conscious removal from circulation. It has been theorised that these objects have been charged with some form of power or
pollutant, and regardless of length of circulation, they need to be altered in some manner upon their exit from usage. However,
this data can be easily skewed because the majority of Iron Age objects reported from a wetland context are metal. Objects of
a different material type may have a distinct method of depositional practice, but this is difficult to dispute. When for example,
wooden objects have only gained value archaeologically since the discovery of various major wetland settlements throughout
Britain in the 1960s. Additionally, objects such as the Roos Carr figurines (Yorkshire), are assumed to be votive because they are
incomplete. However, other theories could also be valid - such as a child losing their toy in transit. Therefore, this project aims to
analyse objects curated in museums and private collections or recorded through various digital platforms such as the Treasure
Trove and the Portable Antiquities Scheme in a holistic manner. The purpose of this is to re-interpret preconceived notions of
socio-cultural interaction with what is considered peripheral and at times liminal landscape. This project serves to analyse object
transition and withdrawal from terrestrial use to wetland deposition, from whole to fractured, from straight to bent, from fire to
water, and other evolutions or changes of an objects’ personification within a community through the collection of object data.
