A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO IDENTIFICATION OF WAR VICTIMS. A CASE STUDY OF THE BATTLE OF
TORMERSDORF (1813)
Author(s): Zawadzki, Pawel (Fundacja “Łużyce - wczoraj i dziś”) - Pokutta, Dalia (Archaeological Research Laboratory University of Stockholm) - Konczewska, Magdalena (University of Wrocław, Institute of Archeology) - Szczurowski, Jacek - Konczewski, Paweł (Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Department of Anthropology)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Battle of Tormersdorf (then Saxony, modern-day Poland) that took place on 24 May 1813, is among many episodes of the
Napoleonic Wars. Lasting for several hours struggle between French cavalry and Russian Cossacks resulted in deaths of a dozen
soldiers on both sides. Based on historical records we know that fallen soldiers have been buried nearby the battlefield, in a
forest south to the village.
During WWII, in 1945 residents of Tormersdorf were expelled and the village was completely destroyed. In recent years extensive archaeological surveys of this area have been undertaken by the authors of this study. The main aim was to investigate
the cultural and natural heritage of this region, as well as the human-environmental relationship in the past. As a result, among
others, the authors discovered the location of the battlefield and graves containing the remains of three fallen soldiers.
In this presentation, we will discuss key issues relating to localization of burials in the woodland environment. We focus on a
holistic meta-analysis of sources that are helpful not only in a field survey but also in identifying people buried in them. The key
problem seems to be related to the fact that the soldiers’ identity was unknown to the local people who buried them, therefore
regardless on which side they were fighting on, this complication existed already at the time of their internment. Our methodological approach enables a new, creative approach to these issues, and includes historical research, remote sensing and geophysical survey, archaeological excavations, anthropological assessments, and multi-isotopic and genetic analysis.
