CULTURAL INFLUENCES ON THE CASTRATION TIME OF CATTLE IN THE BALTIC SEA REGION DURING
MEDIEVAL AND EARLY MODERN PERIODS
Author(s): Rannamäe, Eve (BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York; Department of Archaeology, Institute of
History and Archaeology, University of Tartu) - Bläuer, Auli (Production Systems, Natural Resources Institute Finland) - Solala,
Hilja (History, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Oxen – the castrated male cattle (Bos taurus) – have been used in Finland and Estonia as draught animals over centuries. For the
earlier periods, the presence of oxen is reflected in the faunal material with proportional differences in bones (especially in metacarpals and horn cores) and pathological changes (caused by traction). Later use of oxen is additionally elucidated by historical
documents, listing the number of animals in households and areas. Both evidence tells us about the past agriculture, which was
determined by cultural influences, differences in welfare, and environmental conditions.
Cattle castration has previously been examined mostly through metrical analyses of metacarpals, where cow, bull and oxen
bones exhibit different proportions – but only if the males have been castrated as young calves (a method that according to
ethnographical sources has been used in Sweden). However, if the males have been castrated as adults (a method that has been
used in Estonia), metacarpals will resemble that of a bull. In Finland, a disagreement has occurred between the osteological and
written evidence: early modern documents indicate that cattle were castrated as calves (Swedish influence), but bone samples
from the Middle Ages exhibit the castration in adulthood (Estonian influence).
To better understand cultural transitions in the agricultural practices relating to draught oxen, we studied the morphometric
changes in a comprehensive assemblage of metacarpals from Finland and Estonia, from the medieval and early modern periods.
To validate some of those results, ancient DNA was used to identify the sex of the specimen. Furthermore, historical sources and
available literature from Finland and Estonia were examined and compared to the zooarchaeological results.
