THE CONTEXTUAL BLADE – TOWARDS A COMPARATIVE AND RADICALLY RELATIONAL
UNDERSTANDING OF EARLY LAMINAR TECHNOLOGIES
Author(s): Hussain, Shumon (Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University) - Schmid, Viola (Department for Early Prehistory and
Quaternary Ecology, University of Tübingen; UMR 7041, Equipe AnTET, Université Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense)
Presentation Format: Oral
In this paper, we suggest that the fundamental recognition of past research on blade technologies from the European Middle
Palaeolithic and the African MSA (Middle Stone Age) is that they rarely occur independently of other reduction systems. If blade/
let production dominates the assemblage, as for instance in the South African Howiesons Poort, this arguably represents an
exceptional case. We content that the effective understanding of the ‘laminar phenomenon’ is currently hampered by a prevailing blade fetishism – a latent aftereffect of the assumption that blades are inherently special. Instead, it is argued that the
evolutionary significance of early blade technology is most likely tied to the emergence of internally differentiated – or highly
‘textured’ – lithic assemblages, in which varying reduction systems, including blade-bearing technologies, had the potential to
complement and sustain each other. Blades, in other words, may have then fulfilled distinct and highly specialised techno-functional needs within particular technical worlds. In the words of economist and technological theorist W. Brian Arthur (2009), the
variability of early laminar technologies might be elucidated as the result of the development of divergent ‘opportunity niches’. It
is this contextual role of laminar systems that has to be investigated in more detail if we wish to decipher the meaning of blades
in hominin evolution. We briefly illustrate this emerging viewpoint and draw out some of its interpretive implications by mustering
a small number of examples from the South African MSA and the European Middle Palaeolithic.
References
Arthur, W.B. 2009. The nature of technology. What it is and how it evolves. New York: Free Press.
