CARRICKFERGUS TOWNSCAPE HERITAGE INITIATIVE: A HIDDEN TOWER HOUSE
Author(s): Patrick, Laura (Queen’s University Belfast)
Presentation Format: Oral
Carrickfergus Townscape Heritage Initiative (THI) is funded by the Heritage Lottery Fund, and delivered by the Mid and East
Antrim Borough Council. The project, 2016 to 2020, supports local property owners in caring for and preserving the town’s historic fabric. Additionally, an Education Programme raises awareness of the importance of our local built heritage, and why it
should be preserved for future generations.
Despite the fact that Carrickfergus was once the premier town in medieval Ulster, unlike its counter parts in the south of the Ireland, for example Kilkenny, much of the town’s medieval fabric has been lost. This loss has been caused through periods of both
destruction and ‘improvement’. Until recently the only structures with any upstanding, positively identified medieval fabric were
the castle and St Nicholas Church, although the latter has been heavily modified. However, thanks to the survival of 16th century
maps, visual evidence provides us with confirmation that there were a range of medieval buildings in the town. The location of a
small selection of have been identified through rescue excavations, but it was only in 2018 that remains of an upstanding tower
house were revealed, thanks to support from the THI Education Programme.
This paper looks at the investigative process that was undertaken, the findings and final outputs. Also addressed is the way in
which buildings are reinterpreted visually for the public, the town-scape and wider tourism offering. Given the proximity to the
coast, how can such a building be protected from coastal erosion and major existing damp issues, while also functioning as a
working hotel As the building was listed, not scheduled, and the earliest photographic image is from c.1890, should it be presented as a tower house, or a Victorian style building? The final planning decision will also be explored in this paper.
