ANALYZING LARGE COLLECTIONS OF NEOLITHIC POTTERY FROM THE SOZH RIVER BASIN (EASTERN
BELARUS)
Author(s): Tkachova, Maryia (Institute of History NAS of Belarus)
Presentation Format: Poster
Active excavations of the Neolithic sites in the Sozh River basin were conducted by A. Kalechyts in the 1970s and 1980s. Following the tradition prevalent at that time, the researcher focused primarily on the accumulation of archeological sources, while the
analysis and interpretation of the material were given less attention.
The study with these collections is complicated by several factors. Voluminosity – more than 20 thousands potsherds from
five main sites – is among them. The further issues are that they came from non-stratified sites and were obtained with the old
method.
Another problem the author faced is which category should act as a unit of counting – a potsherd or a vessel. Fragmentation of
pottery complicates the reconstruction of complete shapes of vessels. The advantage of the material is that each vessel had its
own specific features. There was no mass production of earthenware in the territory of Belarus during the Neolithic. With a close
look at the collections, it was easy to identify potsherds belonging to a separate vessel. The analysis made it evident that it was
the vessel, not the potsherd, should be the basic unit when analyzing such kind of collections.
Each vessel should be considered as a separate phenomenon with its own characteristic features. On the other hand, the Neolithic vessel is a complex system of features, for the documentation and further analysis of which computer methods should be
used.
The statistical methods (correspondence analysis etc.) were employed for determination the hidden links between the variables
included in the analysis.
The study resulted in distinguishing of the really existing types of pottery which reflect the cultural situation in the region. The
revised periodization of the Neolithic of the Eastern Belarus was developed on the basis of the new typology.
