WEAR PATTERNS ON LATE CHALCOLITHIC AND EARLY BRONZE AGE BASALT VESSEL BASES IN THE
SOUTHERN LEVANT. THEIR CHARACTERISTICS AND MEANINGS
Author(s): Hruby, Karolina - Chasan, Rivka (Laboratory for Ground Stone Tools Research, Zinman Institute of Archaeology, University of Haifa) - Groman-Yaroslavski, Iris (The Use-Wear Analysis Laboratory, Zinman Institute of Archaeology, University of
Haifa) - Rosenberg, Danny (Laboratory for Ground Stone Tools Research, Zinman Institute of Archaeology, University of Haifa)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Late Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age periods in the southern Levant mark immense economic and technological developments. These dynamics in evolving socio-economic environments correlate with an increase in craft specialization and the
formation of long-distance exchange networks. This is seen particularly in the distribution of basalt vessels that were traded in
large numbers throughout the region.
Late Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age basalt vessels are characterized by a high-level artisanship and morphological uniformity.
Types are dominated by flat based or fenestrated pedestal vessels during the Late Chalcolithic (often decorated) and flat base
only during the Early Bronze Age (only rarely decorated). These vessels were likely produced by specialists in workshops located
at or in the vicinity of basalt sources, and they were likely regarded as highly valued objects.
During our studies of these vessels in recent years, we noted that these show varying types of intensive wear. One type of wear,
which is the center of our presentation, was noted on a few basalt vessels only. This is a shallow usually polished depression that
was formed on the interior base near the wall, probably resulting from a rotational action of another item within the bowl. The wear
occurs on various types of basalt vessels found at sites located in different parts of modern day Israel. Given the uniqueness
of the wear, we suggest that it is related to a specific function, and while our study of this wear pattern is in its infancy, we will
present a few examples and discuss possible meanings.
