MIND THE GAP. PALAEOENVIRONMENTAL EVOLUTION AND POPULATION DYNAMICS DURING THE 8.2
KYR CAL BP EVENT IN THE NE IBERIAN PENINSULA
Author(s): Ros-Sabé, Eva (Digital Technologies for Social Archaeology - TEDAS, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona - UAB) Revelles, Jordi (Institut Català de Paleoecologia Humana i Evolució Social - IPHES) - Piqué, Raquel (Digital Technologies for Social Archaeology - TEDAS, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona - UAB) - Terradas, Xavier (Archaeology of Social Dynamics - ASD.
CSIC-IMF, Barcelona) - Aguilera, Mònica (Crop and Forest Science Department. ETSEA-University of Lleida - UdL)
Presentation Format: Oral
The 8.2 kyr cal BP event has been proposed as the main cause of population dynamics in northeast of Iberian Peninsula prior to
the adoption of the agriculture. The chronological gap observed in the archaeological sites in this region between ca. 8.2-7.3 kyr
cal BP has been traditionally interpreted as the result of migration to more humid regions. This is the proposed model for the Ebro
Valley region, but is not clearly identifiable in the north-eastern inland and coastal areas. On the one hand, depopulation occurred
prior to the 8.2 event in some areas and affected places were a very low population density has been documented since the
beginning of the Holocene. On the other hand, very few high-resolution proxies allow tracing the effect of the 8.2 climatic event
at local scale. Several pollen records from NE Iberia show a limited impact of this cooling event, expressed in slight mesophilous
taxa regression and a slight increase in shrubs or grasslands. Other pollen records have not enough chronological resolution.
Moreover, other proxies as charcoal analysis represent shorter sequences covering only the previous or later periods, offering,
thus, more chronological resolution and local scale data.
The goal of this paper is to assess the impact of climate change in the transition Mesolithic-Neolithic in Northeast of Iberian
peninsula (8200-7000 cal BP).The result of analysis of δ13C of charcoal will be compared with the pollen and charcoal records in
order to correlate the climatic evidences with vegetation changes and population dynamics.
