COSMIC CONTAINERS - ELEMENTS OF ANCIENT COSMOVISIONS
Author(s): Rappenglück, Barbara (Chiemgau Impact Research Team)
Presentation Format: Oral
The traditions of peoples are packed with wondrous qualities of containers (pots, bowls, jugs, cauldrons, chalices etc.). Vessels
may e.g. serve as uterus, they manage transformation and rebirth, and they contain harm and death, abundance and wisdom.
Beyond that, containers may manifold relate to cosmic symbolism: A basket represents the whole world (Dogon [West Africa]),
a reversed kettle constitutes the heavenly dome (Buryats [Siberia]), the zodiacal constellations are vessels for scooping (Manichaeism), etc. Especially in the context of mythical cosmogonies and cosmovisions the “cosmic container” is a widespread
motive, as e.g. the cosmic gourd of Daoism. But also concrete, really existing vessels may be charged with cosmic meanings, with
their shape, material, decoration and/or context of use contributing to the cosmic symbolism. The lime containers of the Kogi
(Columbia) or decorated ceramic pots of the Shipibo-Conibo (Peru) are examples of such conceptions.
The talk will establish fundamental categories of “cosmic containers”. Furthermore, on the basis of selected examples it will
examine how the fact that such vessels often share special qualities as the ones mentioned above contributes to the complex
symbolism of “cosmic containers”.
Comparative mythology as well as documented traditions and interpretations of peoples concerning concrete vessels will serve
as a basis for this talk.
Literature:
•
Rappenglück, Barbara (2004) Mutterbauch und Kosmos – zur Symbolik des Gefäßes. In: Mensch, Bernhard/Pachnicke,
Peter (eds.) Welt der Gefäße von der Antike bis Picasso, Oberhausen: Ludwig-Galerie (exhibition catalog), 213-222.
•
Reichel-Dolmatoff, Gerardo (1990) The sacred mountain of Colombia’s Kogi Indians. Leiden: Brill.
•
Stein, Rolf Alfred (1987) Le monde en petit : jardins en miniature et habitations dans la pensée religieuse d’Extrême-Orient. Paris: Flammarion.
