ANCIENT RETROVIRUSES IN AID OF DISCOVERING AND CONSERVING ABORIGINAL SHEEP LINEAGES
Author(s): Rannamäe, Eve (BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York; Department of Archaeology, Institute of
History and Archaeology, University of Tartu) - Saarma, Urmas (Department of Zoology, Institute of Ecology and Earth Sciences, University of Tartu) - Ärmpalu-Idvand, Anneli (Kihnu Native Sheep Society) - Teasdale, Matthew (BioArch, Department of
Archaeology, University of York) - Speller, Camilla (Department of Anthropology, University of British Columbia)
Presentation Format: Oral
In Estonia, both genetic and osteological data indicate that sheep husbandry has been consistently an important source of
subsistence in the last three thousand years. Today, sheep farming in Estonia is rather small-scale and economically of minor
importance. However, there is growing interest in native sheep, partly because of their products, but native sheep provide also
a valuable source for conserving genetic diversity and improving modern breeds. This trend has provoked questions about the
origin of aboriginal sheep – the Kihnu native sheep breed – and their connections with ancient populations. We have used the
analysis of endogenous retroviruses in the genomes of ancient and modern sheep from north-eastern Europe to reveal whether the studied individuals have affinities with the “primitive” northern European breeds or belong to a later migratory episode
involving sheep with improved production traits [sensu Chessa et al. Science 324, 532 (2009)]. The method is based on the
amplification of short genomic fragments, using the well-known Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), and on the available data
about retroviral integrations in domestic sheep. However, this is the first time when this method has been applied on Estonian
aboriginal sheep and on ancient sheep populations of north-eastern Europe. While the results on ancient samples elucidate the
history and development of local sheep populations, the analysis on extant aboriginal sheep revealed individuals with primitive
retrotypes, suggesting that the origin of Kihnu native sheep is ancient and they belong to the first wave that brought “primitive”
sheep to Europe. Such primitive sheep lineages currently exist only in the peripheral areas of Europe. The results are useful in
finding and conserving the most aboriginal lineages among the Kihnu native sheep and helping to envisage breeding strategies.
