MOBILE MOUNTAINS EARLY NEOLITHIC SOCIETIES THROUGH THE INTEGRATION OF
ZOOARCHAEOLOGICAL AND ISOTOPIC ANALYSES: THE FONT MAJOR CASE (CATALONIA)
Author(s): Messana, Chiara (Universitat Rovira i Virgili - URV, Àrea de Prehistòria; Institut Català de Paleoecologia Humana
i Evolució Social - IPHES) - Martín, Patricia (Seminari d’Estudis i Recerques Prehistòriques - SERP, Facultat de Geografia i
Història, Universitat de Barcelona) - Tornero, Carlos - Vergès, Josep Maria (Institut Català de Paleoecologia Humana i Evolució
Social - IPHES; Universitat Rovira i Virgili - URV, Àrea de Prehistòria)- Fontanals, Marta (Universitat Rovira i Virgili - URV, Àrea de
Prehistòria; Institut Català de Paleoecologia Humana i Evolució Social - IPHES)
Presentation Format: Poster
The cova de la Font Major site, where the River Francolí is born, is located on the foot of the eastern slope of Prades hills (L’Espluga de Francolí, Catalonia; 411 m. a.s.l.) and turns out to be a natural way of communication between the coast and the internal
area. During the Early Neolithic period the site was occupied and, supposedly, the settlement would be used as an overwinter
valley-bottom location of a short-distance vertical movement directed towards the highest altitudes of the Prades mountains
(highest peak: 1202 m.). The aim of the present research project is to study past pastoral communities of the Font Major site
based on the management and exploitation of mobile livestock, specifically caprine. The integration of osteological and biochemical analyses will help us to confirm or deny, through direct evidence, the interpretations derived from the most traditional
archaeological approaches and will provide new valuable cultural, socio-economic and environmental data. The information derived from the analyses of the faunal remains will concern the composition of mobile livestock (species, age, sex), the annual
reproductive dynamics, the seasonal feeding habits and the annual mobility patterns. The results will give a seasonal temporal
resolution, which is the only possible way to understand the occupation dynamics of ancient pastoral communities based on the
management and exploitation of mobile livestock. The biochemical data obtained from archaeological caprine bones and teeth
remains will be compared with those obtained from modern sampled herds, which will be use as a baseline for interpreting the
final results. The referential specimens belong to the Mas d’en Pepet pen (Rojals, Prades mountains; 880 m a.s.l.), a long-term
experimental program promoted by IPHES on the Prades hills since 2014. Data from archaeobotanical and micromorphological
analyses of the dung deposits on this pen is used to strength final interpretations.
