VIKING AGE DIET IN AARHUS: AN ISOTOPIC INVESTIGATION OF HUMAN AND FAUNAL REMAINS
Author(s): Swenson, Dain (Department of Icelandic and Comparative Cultural Studies, University of Iceland) - Fuller, Benjamin
(Department of Archaeology and Heritage Studies, Aarhus University) - Kveiborg, Jacob - Ritchie, Kenneth (Department of
Archaeological Science and Conservation, Moesgaard Museum) - Kristjánsdóttir, Steinunn (Faculty of History and Philosophy,
University of Iceland) - Olsen, Jesper (Aarhus AMS Centre, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus University) - Linaa,
Jette - Larsen, Lars (Department of Archaeology, Moesgaard Museum) - Mannino, Marcello (Department of Archaeology and
Heritage Studies, Aarhus University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Stable isotope ratio analyses on Viking Age human and faunal specimens from Denmark have only been undertaken at a few sites
(e.g. Galgedil). Little evidence of the diet of inhabitants of Viking towns is available and isotopic baselines for detailed reconstructions are also lacking, with the notable exception of the baseline for Hedeby (= Haithabu). Our study, funded by the Aarhus
University Research Foundation (Aarhus Universitets Forskningsfond) through the project titled Danish and European Diets in
Time (AUFF grant number: 21276), addresses both these issues, presenting carbon and nitrogen isotope data on human bone
fragments and on a wide range of likely contemporaneous fauna which were recovered during excavations at Sankt Clemens
Stræde in Aarhus (central-eastern Jutland). Aarhus (= Aros) was founded by the Vikings in the 8th century and became one of
the largest towns in Jutland, alongside Ribe and Hedeby. A ring fortress was constructed in the 10th century to protect the town
and was later reinforced by Harald Bluetooth, which suggests this was a politically and militarily strategic settlement, as well as
a major trade centre. The faunal remains will be used to establish the local isotopic baseline for Aros and include: domesticated
animals (e.g. cattle, pig, sheep, horse, cat), birds (e.g. waterfowl, crow) and 12 species of fish (e.g. cod, haddock, herring, perch).
The results of this research will be used to investigate the diet of the Viking inhabitants, as well as provide important data on
the local trophic web and on whether the fish consumed in Aros were caught locally. Moreover, the isotopic data from the fauna
will be useful to investigate the relationship between the town and its hinterland, which is important to ascertain the degree of
urbanization.
