FROM THE FIELD TO THE GLOBE: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF GLOBALIZATION STRENGTHS AND
WEAKNESSES OF A GROWING DISCIPLINE
Author(s): Autiero, Serena (Sun Yat-sen University)
Presentation Format: Oral
The archaeology of globalization is a relatively new field, which still has a number of shortcomings which need to be addressed.
In this paper I seek to examine these issues and to make the case for the archaeology of globalisation being recognized as an
autonomous research field. The body of theories we call Globalisation studies can add a lot to the understanding of the ancient
world. Indeed, the theoretical frame implemented by scholars to understand present day connectivities is a precious tool in the
archaeologist’s box. From a theoretical point of view, therefore, it is safe to consider the discipline on the right path; the biggest
problems arise when dealing with case studies. Ancient Globalisation is obviously an extremely wide topic, both from a chronological and from a geographical point of view. It can only be understood if set in context, meaning that a specific case must be
put in the wider frame of similar coeval phenomena; however, one cannot expect from area specialists to become omniscient
once they start dealing with globalisation issues. How to solve this conundrum? How can an area specialist face globalisation?
Is it possible to go past a biased approach?
The most outstanding example of bias in the archaeology of globalisation involves the recent re-opening of Classical archaeology to the study of long distance relations in Roman times, it is a fact that very recent works rely on outdated bibliography and
revive a colonial approach, virtually ignoring the work done in the areas where the material originates in the last century. The
archaeologist of globalisation needs to navigate into multidisciplinarity and must have the humility and open-mindedness to rely
on team work with area specialists. Only in this way the archaeology of globalisation can claim a better unbiased understanding
of human history.
