LIFESTYLE OF LATE NEOLITHIC POPULATION IN LAKE LUBĀNS WETLAND
Author(s): Loze, Ilse Biruta (Institute of Latvian History, University of Latvia) - Ceriņa, Aija (Faculty of Geography and Earth
Sciences, University of Latvia) - Dumpe, Baiba (National Museum of Latvian History, Department of Archeology) - Dūrītis, Ilmārs (Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Life Sciences and Technology) - Eberhards, Guntis - Grūbe, Gunita - Kalniņa,
Laimdota (Faculty of Geography and Earth Sciences, University of Latvia) - Mugurēvičs, Arnis (Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Life Sciences and Technology) - Paparde, Līga (Faculty of Geography and Earth Sciences, University of Latvia)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Lake Lubāns wetland population’s lifestyle during the late Neolithic and partly the beginning of Bronze age can be characterized by material obtained at Abora, Asne, Eiņi, Iča un Lagaža settlements.
The population of the Lake Lubāns wetland at the late Neolithic experienced a partial inflow of corded ware culture in all of the
aforementioned settlements, where it was represented both by Thuringian amphorae and the A-type axe, but also by the pottery
types of later development phases of this culture.
The late Neolithic economy was based on the use of local resources – the abundance of freshwater fish and hunting fauna,
however, also sustaining care for a small number of livestock (cattle, sheep/goat). The late Neolithic period saw the flourishing of
portable art – anthropomorphic sculptures made of horn, figurines of adders and grass snakes cut in bone, as well as the creation
of personal bone adornments – pendants, discs and lunulae (Abora).
Particular attention should also be paid to the use of ornaments, signs and engravings, as well as the application of cuts on horn
axes and hunting daggers (Iča).
Paleo-osteological studies conducted allow to trace the content of the late Neolithic hunting trophies (terrestrial and avian fauna, ichthyofauna), placing in the foreground wild boar and elk as the main hunting objects. The most recent studies are directly
related to Iča settlement, where 15 mammal species are represented, of these 7 are predators.
Lubāns Stone Age seed flora was studied, establishing the presence of Salvinia natans megaspores.
On the basis of elaborated transgression and regression phases of the Lake Lubāns, the Lake Lubāns development model has
been elaborated. The results of investigation into the vegetation history mark the actual start of cereals’ introduction at the
Subboreal period.
