PARCO DI ARCHEOLOGIA CONDIVISA. CITIZEN SCIENCE, ECONOMY AND WELL-BEING FOR THE
ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXCAVATION OF THE THIRD MILLENNIUM
Author(s): Megale, Carolina (Past in Progress)
Presentation Format: Oral
Since 2008, the global archaeology project that takes place at the archaeological area of Poggio del Molino (Populonia, Tuscany)
sets the relationship between researchers and citizens at the centre of its experience. The field research is managed through a
field school for students and volunteers from all around the world: the archaeological excavation is where archaeology is shared
and where professionals work on behalf of the community, while citizens contribute to the research with excavation assistance
activities, well aware that the past belongs to all of us.
Following the principles of crowd-economy, the scientific research is funded by those who take part in the excavations, by means
of micro-patronage and of sponsorships from private companies. The archaeological field school at Poggio del Molino is open to
everyone. On site, tasks are allocated depending on the different ages and the personal goals of the participants.
The aim of the project is to organise and create a shared archaeological area: a public area accessible to everyone where citizens
can spend their free time and be involved in the excavations process. In the hopes of professionals the creation of this Park will
lead to an increase of the reception capacity of the site by organising spaces shared by archaeologists and the community, by
further improving the educational and communicational programs. In addition to this, the project will aim to restore a portion of a
unique territory that can be given back to the people, so they may take benefit from their own cultural heritage.
In the modern world of knowledge, the ongoing experience at Poggio del Molino demonstrates how the will to extend and embed
the role of archaeology in contemporary society can produce benefits, not only on a theoretical level of historical research but
also on practical, economic and social levels.
