VIKING-AGE CROSS-PENDANTS IN NORTH-EASTERN RUS’: NEW ASPECTS ON PRODUCTION AND
CIRCULATION OF CHRISTIAN METALWORK AT THE PERIPHERY OF CONVERTED EUROPE
Author(s): Zaytseva, Irina - Makarov, Nikolay (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
The purpose of the paper is to discuss the objects of Christian metalwork, which were recently discovered on the sites of Suzdal
region, near the boundaries of the Christian world of the late Viking period, and to make comments on their production, circulation, cultural and religious meaning. Research is focused on one of one group of these objects: equilateral crosses with widening
branches with three balls (disks) at the ends, the so-called crosses of ”Scandinavian type”.
The paper presents results of complex examination of 17 cross-pendants with the insight into their morphology, manufacturing
techniques and metal composition. Distribution of the finds proves, that such crosses were introduced to Susdal region at the
end of X–XI centuries, initially at the ”large dwelling sites”. The development of these settlements is associated with a special
economic system (weight economy) and a special culture, well-known from the excavations of early urban settlements.
Large crosses from Suzdal represent the established iconographic type, but are attributed as the products of local craft. They
were cast from high-tin bronze. It has a silvery color, simulating the expensive silver objects. From the fine work of silver crosses,
which they imitate, they are distinguished by a high relief and the presence of hemispheres at the ends of branches.
Small crosses, which have a high degree of standardization, were made of multicomponent alloy, one of the most common alloys
in Northern Rus’ in the XI century. Probably, they were manufactured in one or several large production centers since the first half
of the XI century. The production of standardized crosses and their wide dissemination could have been an important issue in the
translation of the new religion to wider groups of the Rus’ society.
The study is performed with support by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, № 17-29-04129.
