RHYTHM IN FORM AND DECOR OF MEDIEVAL WOODEN AND BONE ARTEFACTS FROM OLD RUS’
Author(s): Zhilina, Natalia (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
The aim is to observe the role of rhythm in the form and decor upon carved items. In the form of rationally built thing (for example,
a chair), interrelation between its parts is characterized by the rhythm reflecting the construction (constructive rhythm). Surface decoration is distributed between the ornamental zones on the main parts of the object (ornamental compositions of chair
backs). Sculpture images continue the regularity of constructive rhythm by the volume accentuation of important parts (bone
spikes). It emphasizes the form of the object. New ornamental rhythm of surface compositions may not or not fully correspond
to the constructive rhythm. Sometimes it visually destroys the form of the item.
Depictions of any object with rational natural rhythm are included in ornament: plant, animal, man. Ornamental rhythm changes or
breaks the natural one. In anthropomorphic, zoomorphic and floral ornaments, the parts of figures are made corresponding one
to another. An element with defined magnitude and form becomes the rhythmic unit (square, triangle; straight or curved section).
An ornamental element is analogous to the unit of duration in music. From the elements the motif is built, the magnitude of every
part is aliquot to the element. Compositions are built on the surface of the object or in the space occupied by it, like rhythms
(melodies) in music unfolding over time.
According to the correspondence between rhythm and form, carved items can be divided into groups: 1) keeping the natural
rhythm in general; 2) breaking it by emphasizing some parts of the image (idols); 3) giving elementary stylization with simple
rhythmic unit; 4) made in artistic styles with difficult ornamental rhythm characterized by curvilinearity and asymmetry (Scandinavian styles); creating a clear regular rhythm (Byzantine ornament).
These groups show the forming of Russian ornamental styles in the 10th – 11th centuries.
