SUGAR PRODUCTION AT AGAETE FACTORY (GRAN CANARIA,16TH CENTURY AD): THE
ARCHAEOMETRIC STUDY OF THE SUGAR CONES
Author(s): Buxeda i Garrigós, Jaume - Madrid i Fernández, Marisol (Universitat de Barcelona) - del Pino Curbelo, Miguel (Universitat d’Alacant) - del Cristo González Marrero, María (Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria) - Barroso Cruz, Valentín
- Marrero Quevedo, Consuelo (Arqueocanaria S.L.)
Presentation Format: Oral
Sugar cane cultivation was part of the colonial society, and one of the economic bases of the Castilian expansion through the Atlantic Ocean. Its dissemination influenced the development of new ceramic production patterns in order to supply this industry
in colonized territories. Moreover, contrary to what happens with glazed ceramics, industrial pottery was probably produced in
local workshops, creating new production structures in the colonies, affecting the previous social indigenous relationships, and
creating new ones characteristic of the new colonial model.
This research is part of the Tecnolonial project and focuses on the study of those new production structures that appeared on
the island of Gran Canaria during the 16th century. After a first phase with the analysis of 19 sugar cone samples, this second
phase includes more sugar cones, but also other ceramics recovered at the site. All materials have been characterized by a set
of complementary techniques (X-ray fluorescence, X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscope, optical microscopy), and the
results have been compared with indigenous pottery and with pottery produced in the Iberian Peninsula. The results show the
existence of different fabrics among those sugar cones, including calcareous pastes clearly imported, along with low calcareous
groups, some of them of certainly local origin. Moreover, technical differences have been found related to grain size and firing
temperatures, possibly caused by different production techniques (the introduction of potter’s wheel) and firing structures (the
introduction of kilns). Thus, the results show the creation of new products and consumption patterns associated with the colonial process, with the establishment of new workshops, where new production techniques were used.
