GOLDEN NETWORKS - AN INTERDISCIPLINARY APPROACH TO IDENTIFY PRODUCER AND CONSUMER
RELATIONS IN THE EARLY LATÈNE PERIOD
Author(s): Fuerst, Sebastian (Curt-Engelhorn Zentrum Archäometrie gGmbH, Mannheim; Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum, Mainz) - Armbruster, Barbara (CNRS) - Lockhoff, Nicole - Schwab, Roland (Curt-Engelhorn-Zentrum Archäometrie
gGmbH)
Presentation Format: Oral
From the mid-5th c. BC onwards, a new élite emerged in an area that reached from Luxembourg in the west to the Glauberg in the
east, mainly covering almost all parts of todays Rhineland-Palatinate, Saarland and parts of Hessen. This élite is reflected by rich
burials that usually contain drinking vessels from the Mediterranean world, two-wheeled wagons and above all gold jewellery.
In context of the ANR/DFG Project CELTIC GOLD, we were able to analyze the gold objects from various research perspectives:
scientifically regarding the material composition, technologically regarding the applied crafting techniques, and from a cultural
history point of view regarding the different stylistic features. In this paper we would like to present our preliminary results with
focus on our interdisciplinary approach to integrate all the different research findings ranging from scientific analyses and technical investigations to sylistic art interpretation. We suggest a twofold theoretical framework: At first we distinguish between
composition groups, manufacturing techniques, and stylistic features. In a second step we perform a network analysis for each
different aspect (composition, technology and stylistics). Our first results suggest different topological features of each network like centrality degrees or clustering coefficents. These different networks improve our understanding of the differences
and yet interlocking of the distribution, production and consumption systems during that time. This example illustrates that,
paradoxically, a separate conceptualization of the different dimensions of metalworking enables an integrative perspective.
