FUNERARY TREATMENTS AND SOCIAL STATUS OF PERINATES IN CLASSIC KERMA PERIOD (SUDAN),
THE 8B-51 NECROPOLIS OF SAÏ ISLAND (ACH CHAMALIYA)
Author(s): Partiot, Caroline - Castex, Dominique (UMR 5199 PACEA, Bordeaux) - Guillon, Mark (Inrap; UMR 5199 PACEA, Bordeaux) - Maureille, Bruno (UMR 5199 PACEA, Bordeaux)
Presentation Format: Oral
Despite the studies dealing with burial practices on adults, a lack of information exists on funerary treatments and social status
of perinates and children during the Sudanese antiquity. New study of the funerary treatments on the Classic Kerma 8B-51
necropolis, excavated between 1999 and 2001 on the Nile island of Saï and dedicated to very young children, provides an opportunity to contribute to this topic. The aim of our study was to explore the social status of infants who died around birth in the
Sudanese society, relatively to the immature individuals who survived longer and to the treatment documented on adults. We
used archeothanatological and bioarcheological analysis as well as a Geographic Information System on the 62 immatures and 2
adults of the site. Following our results, all graves shared common characteristics, whatever the age at death was. For example,
most of the immature individuals were in a relatively contracted position, most frequently placed on the right side, and often
sometimes on the left side. However, differences of burial characteristics were seen according to age group. Individuals who
died quickly soon after birth were offered slightly more varied treatments, but with constant particular care. Children aged two
months and above were the only ones with wooden bed and amulets, like normal funerary devices documented for adult in Kerma
Classic Period. Surprisingly, none of both contemporaneous adults of the necropolis were treated traditionally, leaving open the
question of the significance of this deviant treatment against their own status in the group. Our results support the hypothesis
of a specific status of individuals who died before being fully integrated in the Kerma society, providing a better understanding of
this culture without writing system and new perspectives for further researches.
