TRANSMISSION OF CULTURAL ELEMENTS IN THE LATE STAGE OF THE KRIVODOL-SĂLKUŢA-BUBANJ
HUM COMPLEX IN R. NORTH MACEDONIA
Author(s): Spirova, Marina (Archaeological Museum of Macedonia)
Presentation Format: Oral
The 4th M BC brings a lot of changes within the Late Chalcolithic culture on the territory of the Republic of North Macedonia.
Unlike the early phase where contacts between the communities can be traced both east/northeast and north, during the late
stage the cultural interactions with the neighboring regional groups from the north seem to dominate. This transfer of ideas and
new elements introduced transformation of the material culture.
Several occurrences of elements from northern regional groups have been documented in horizons belonging to the late stage
of the regional Shuplevec-Bakarno Gumno group, as part of the larger Krivodol-Sălkuţa-Bubanj Hum complex. Migrations in the
Danube region have resulted in displacement of the population of several regional groups in the central Balkan region and subsequent movement toward the south. They are the carriers of new, previously not found elements in the material culture that
correspond to the Kostolac-Koţofeni horizon in the Morava valley.
Evidence of long-distance exchanges can also be found in the material from the Late Chalcolithic. Some of these elements are
of the so-called steppe origin – like the zoomorphic scepter and the Schnur decoration (corded ware) of the pottery, typical of
Cernavodă I.
This presentation aims to contribute to a better understanding of the changes in the material culture, by looking at the pottery
typology and decoration techniques, as well as the changes within the figurine production. The introduction of these new elements also corresponds to transformations in the spiritual life of the Chalcolithic communities and the abandonment of the
ritual practices and ritual sites used during the previous phase of the Chalcolithic. The presentation also reflects on the close
ties that this group had with neighboring cultures.
