URBANISM, HEALTH AND PARKOUR: USING ARCHAEOLOGY TO EXPLORE THE BIOLOGICAL BENEFITS
OF A GROWING URBAN DISCIPLINE IN EUROPE AND AFRICA
Author(s): Schulz, Ariadne (-) - Lebrasseur, Ophelie (Department of Archaeology, Classics and Egyptology, University of Liverpool)
Presentation Format: Oral
The emergence of cities c. 5000 years ago is a relatively recent phenomenon in the history of our species, yet these urban centres are now home to more than half of the world’s population. Despite better access to healthcare, substantial concerns have
been highlighted regarding the health impact associated with such rapid population growth in these geographically-restricted
environments. One such health issue is the increase of biological stress usually developed as a result of circulating endemic
diseases, periods of malnutrition, environmental changes and/or biomechanical stress. Another major health concern is that
of mental illnesses which arise from a combination of social, psychological and biological factors, and interacts with physical
health. An additional contributory factor to health lies in the design of urban centres: often crowded and busy, with imposing
buildings and horizontal and vertical viewsheds, movement is often constrained not only by physical barriers such as passageways and walls, but also by the invisible delimitation resulting from the segregation of people into distinct neighbourhoods on the
basis of ethnicity, gender, age and social status, all rooted in past events.
The concept of Parkour, a French discipline from the mid 1990s, is to move across the urban environment as quickly and effectively as possible. In this paper, we will combine bioarchaeology, anthropology, sociology and sport studies to assess the health
and social benefit of parkour. We will first review the prevalence of biological stress markers and their causes in ancient urban
and rural Europe and Africa. We will then compare it to modern data from parkour-practitioners (traceurs) and non-practitioners,
paying particular attention to movement, social interactions and perceptions through time. Finally, we will conclude with some
thoughts on how the past can help us understand the reasons underlying the health benefit of parkour.
