PROVENANCE AND AUTHENTICATION OF RECONSTRUCTIONS: THE FUTURE OF PREHISTORIC
BUILDINGS IN THE JOMON SITES OF JAPAN WORLD HERITAGE NOMINATION
Author(s): Ertl, John (Keio University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Since 2009, eighteen Jomon period (14,000-300 BCE) sites in Northern Japan have been undergoing nomination as World Heritage. These sites represent the diversity of Jomon hunter-gatherer culture that exists throughout the Japanese archipelago. Of
the many hurdles during nomination, one question that remains is what to do with the fifty-seven reconstructions (pit houses
and post-in-ground buildings) at these sites. As Jomon buildings were made from organic materials, it was mostly indirect remains that informed their design. As such, some have called for these buildings to be dismantled because of their potential to
distort the image of the past. Others argue they are essential resources for education, tourism, and revitalization.
This presentation examines the problems of provenance – the ability to trace back the data and decision-making processes that
informed their shape. Prehistoric reconstruction has a short history in Japan, with the earliest examples from the late 1940s.
Today there are approximately 350 sites with 900 buildings. Over that time, several aspects of their material and design remain
obdurate, while others have radically changed. This paper argues that the debates of authenticity stem from the overall lack of
recording their provenance. In some cases, revolutionary new analytical techniques are applied, while others simply copy earlier
designs – but for the most part this information is not recorded. In looking to the far future of these World Heritage sites, archaeological remains will not provide new data to resolve all the questions that surround them. What will be important is documenting
the decisions, experiments, trials, and the mistakes that will continue to inform and re-inform their shape. In this regard, archaeology in the future should strive to learn more from its own history than from remains belonging to the ancient past.
