BLADES IN RETROSPECT- THE CONTRIBUTION OF ABU SIF TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE
TECHNOLOGICAL ORGANIZATION IN THE EARLY MIDDLE PALAEOLITHIC
Author(s): wojtczak, dorota (IPAS, Basel University) - Malinsky-Buller, Ariel (MONREPOS; Archaeological Research Centre and
Museum for Human Behavioural Evolution)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Early Middle Palaeolithic (EMP) in the Levant presents a unique phenomenon, diverse modes of blade production dominate
the technological organization. Unlike the previous and later appearance of blade production, an intermittent innovation throughout Eurasia and Europe; between 250 and 160 ka ago within a confined geographical boundary of the Levant, blades and their
by-products were the main “behavioural package.” The EMP lithic assemblages comprised of several techno-typological traits,
the use of Levallois, laminar and cores on flakes reductions. Furthermore, it seems that within each single reduction sequence,
there is versatility and changes between technological concepts arise, allowing prolongation of the core’s utility, thus an enhanced control of blank production.
Here, we reintroduce the assemblages from Abu Sif excavated in 1935, the first EMP site excavated and analysed. These lithic
assemblages, despite biased collection methods, will contribute to the understanding of the EMP technological organisation.
Those results highlight the techno-typological diversity in the mode of production, yet reflect the narrow variation that is shared
with all known EMP sites. The possible social and demographic implications of this low-diversity within a cohesive geographical
and chronological framework will be discussed within the previous Late Lower and later Middle Paleolithic record of the Levant.
Additionally, a less intensive occupation during the EMP than the preceding epoch provides an alternative indication of discontinuity between these periods. There is no evidence of dramatic ecological or climatic changes in Levant during the transition
period which could relate to either the extinction of an entire meta-population or support the flow of new people. Furthermore,
these transitions seem to be relatively quick, chronologically. The relationship between demographical and ecological dynamics
seems responsible for changes within local technological and behavioural patterns. Yet, complexities arise when incorporating
the regional dynamics into long-term evolutionary scenarios.
