THE LITHIC PROCUREMENT AND PRODUCTION ACTIVITY IN THE LATE NEOLITHIC PERIOD IN THE
SOUTH PART OF TRANSDANUBIA
Author(s): Szilagyi, Kata (Mora Ferenc Museum)
Presentation Format: Oral
Starting from an analysis of the 6200 chipped stone tools of the Late Neolithic Alsónyék–Bátaszék site (Southeast-Transdanubia, Hungary), this contribution will explore the following questions, related to main raw material used: the Mecsek radiolarite:
1.What were the criteria of selection and strategies of procurement of the knappable lithic raw materials? 2. What production
methods can be identified in connection with the use of the local raw material at Alsónyék and in the Southeastern group of the
Lengyel culture? 3. Which were the Late Neolithic sites in the Great Hungarian Plan where the Mecsek radiolarite appeare? 4.
What was the value of this radiolarite type in Transdanubia and Great Hungarian Plan? 5. What kind of exchange network was
connected to the Mecsek radiolarite? 6. Can we reconstruct the distribution routes of this radiolarite?
Beside the presence of trans-regional flints, the greatest quantity of the lithic raw material in Late Neolithic in Transdanubia and
the Great Hungarian Plain is radiolarite from the East-Mecsek Mountains. This is a raw material of good quality and available in
sufficient quantities to cater the raw material demand of the region. The geological sources of this radiolarite were located very
close to Alsónyék. The patterns of raw material distribution, indicate very strong local networks around the Alsónyek site. This
tendency is very similar the contemporaneous Lengyel settlement like Zengővárkony, Pécsvárad–Aranyhegy, Lengyel–Sánc,
Villánykövesd and Mórágy–Tűzkődomb also.
Investigating the nature and significance of the use of local raw materials, this contribution will discuss the results of an ongoing
geoarcheological research project in the eastern part of the East-Mecsek Mountains focused on locating and documenting the
exact geological sources of local radiolarite in order to reconstruct the procurement strategies. These findings will be put into a
larger perspective of Late Neolithic southern Transdanubian interaction networks.
