GLASINAC – EMERGENCE OF POWER REFLECTED IN BURIAL LANDSCAPES
Author(s): Pravidur, Andrijana (National Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Presentation Format: Oral
The seventh century BC in the Early Iron Age cultural groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina is primarily marked by rich burials which
reflect emergence of local but powerful elites. These exceptional graves appear when the Early Iron Age burial ritual is already
established as something conceptually different from the Bronze Age burial practice. They suggest rather sudden social differentiation and emergence of powerful elites which are sometimes to easily described as aristocracy. This is especially visible at
Glasinac. It is region located in the eastern part of Bosnia and Herzegovina, extending from the Romanija Mountain in the west
to the Drina River in the east. The name of Glasinac in archaeology usually refers to groups of tumuli necropolises created in
that area in Bronze and Iron Age. It is also considered to be core area of a much larger cultural complex that in the Early Iron Age
stretched over large area of Central Balkans. The larger area of Glasinac complex and even more specific core area of Glasinac in
Bosnia and Herzegovina covers extremely important communication routes between different cultural Iron Age regions of this
part of Europe. Especially important contacts were established to the production centers of the Mediterranean world. All this
probably enabled flourishing of Glasinac communities in the seventh century BC which is primarily reflected in content of elite
burials. It was definitely turning point when this area became power centre in this area of Balkans with large influence of neighbouring areas and well connected with Greek and Italian world. Since we know very little of their settlements, changes in social
structure and material culture are best reflected in grave contentexts. Tumuli necropolises of that period also create extraordinary burial landscapes, unique in this part of Europe.
