THE WRONG TOOL FOR THE JOB? CLASSICAL ARCHAEOLOGY METHODS IN THE STUDY OF
PREHISTORY: THE CASE OF THE CYCLADIC FIGURINES
Author(s): Chrysovitsanou, Vasiliki (University of West Attica)
Presentation Format: Oral
The, mostly, marble figurines are the most iconic feature of the Cycladic civilization. The white marble, the simplified form and the
strange appearance of the statuettes have attracted the interest of European tourists, geographers, geologists and collectors
of curiosities from the late 18th century. In the two-and-a-half centuries, during which Cycladic figurines have drawn the attention of experts, and indeed of non-experts, the approaches that have been adopted are many and varied. Until the end of the 19th
century, most researchers, with the notable exception of Tsountas, have examined the Cycladic figurines from the perspective
of the great works of art of classical antiquity and depreciated them. This began to change in the 20th century, when modern
sculptors, in search of new ways of expression, found in the Cycladic figurines, as well as in the works of sculpture of other
“primitive” civilizations, elements that would revitalize their art. Their fast rising popularity, mainly from the 1960s onwards, led
many scholars to study them outside their archaeological context. The Cycladic figurines were now studied without reference
to their archaeological identity, as works of art, products of great artists/masters of prehistory, while, through typology, artists,
workshops and island schools have been identified. This new approach is carried out by using the methodology and tools of
classical archaeology. The question examined in this paper is whether the method used in classical archaeology, for example,
the typological examination by Beazley of the pottery of the classical era, can be applied to works produced by the prehistoric
craftsmen of the Cyclades. The applicability of such an approach becomes even more doubtful given the fact that the actual
use of these figurines has not been established, that for most of them we lack a clear archaeological context and that so-called
“shapeless” and “naturalistic” figurines coexist.
