BY 2 AND 3D-DOCUMENTATION TO 4D-INTERPRETATION OF INSULA V 1, POMPEII
Author(s): Leander, Anne-Marie (Lund University, Department of archaeology and ancient history; The Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities)
Presentation Format: Oral
Digital approaches to standing remains in Pompeii, and their outcome are the issue of this presentation. The study of Insula V1
started as a traditional building archaeological project in 2000. An image database was implemented in 2008 (www.pompejiprojektet.se) and enriched with 3D models processed after laser scanning in 2013-15. Subsequently, with the creation of 3DHop
applications, the 3D archive developed into a means to address research questions, try old and raise new hypotheses and to
discuss their validity in remote. Today, the study demands less time in the field and invites at any time to teamwork discussion
on interpretation.
The 2D photographic database was created as a means of documentation and insula-wide comparison. The 3D archive adds
information that cannot be obtained by the traditional means, not by photographs nor by scrutiny on site. It has proven an invaluable non-invasive way to pursue investigation, to further hypotheses emerging from the previous, traditional fieldwork and to indicate points of particular interest for future fieldwork. In interplay, the 2D and 3D archives produce a new bias to much discussed
questions in Pompeian scholarship, such as, search for original plots and development of property lines over time, or spotting
overall patterns of building materials or techniques and thereby assess their diagnostic value for historical interpretation. In
this line of research one unexpected result concerns the probability for early, shared use of certain spaces of the insula interior.
The possibility to have both detail and bird’s eye-visions makes the ancient building process visible in an unprecedented way. A
new workflow is suggested, by which attempts to understand the development of Pompeian city-blocks should start by scrutiny of perimeters. To accelerate study, scanning should be effectuated early to permit remote study and conscious choices in
documentation effort.
