HERITAGE, CULTURE, IDEOLOGY AND ARCHEOLOGICAL AESTHETICS DURING DICTATORIAL REGIMES
IN EUROPE AND AMERICA
Theme: Archaeological heritage and museum management: future chances, future risks
Organisers: Martín López, David (Department of Art History, University of Granada) - Chatzikonstantinou, Katerina (Department of Architecture, University of Thessaly)
Format: Regular session
Architectural and urban heritage memory has been important for dictatorships and authoritarian regimes in Europe and America
during 20th century. It can be considered a cultural and political weapon to create a new ideology about their origins, roots, and
meanings. In this sense, archaeological intervention has been fundamental in order to sustain the discourse of identity, race,
inherent to a specific population regarding the difference of the ”other”. Nations and countries with these political atmospheres
have changed their archeological sites aiming to reinforce the ideals of each regime.
In addition, the underlying roots to the history that can be perceived in an archaeological excavation and its associate museographic and urbanistic discourse, allow to understand the historical legacy at the same time than the ideology of the political
regime. This session emphasizes the discourse and ideological imaginary of dictatorships and their use in archaeology, in their
cultural history and in their architectural, urbanistic aesthetics and in the methods themselves to excavate and reflect the results obtained.
In particular, we would encourage works that explore the following topics:
•
Explores distinct socio-political and economical circumstances that formed specific national tourism development
policies with archaeological significance during European and American dictatorships.
•
Offers an overview of the international relationship between heritage, archaeology and political ideology during the
regimes of 20th century.
•
Reviews archetype places where the heritage of the archaeological site is deeply connected with Fascism or Communism.
•
Analyse how during Democracy those archaeological sites have been reconverted, readapted and resignified into new
perspectives.
•
Raises questions on the success or failure of the tourism strategic focus of the archaeological sites’ policies during
the dictatorships.
Papers that offer comparative perspectives, especially across nations, are especially desired.
