FORGET ABOUT FACTS!
Author(s): Meier, Thomas (Institute for Pre- and Protohistory and Near Eastern Archaeology, Heidelberg University)
Presentation Format: Oral
The idea that empirically observable facts allow to recognise an objective truth was mainly invented in the context of Christian
theology in 17th-century western Europe. Although enlightenment had driven out the Christian god from academia and although
idealism and constructivism have frequently disproved the objectivity of facts and the recognisability of truth, academia has
hardly questioned these concepts or made any attempts to ground truth and empiricism on new fundaments.
Today’s accuse of post-factualism emphasises that aberrant ways of argumentation deny the logical structure of empiricism,
but at the same time overlooks that these alternative logics still argue along the idea of facts. Thus the term “post-factual”
is misleading, because the dissonance is not on the sheer existence of facts, but on the plausibilities of their interpretation.
What’s shocking in post-factuality is the dissolution of established intersubjective standards in favour of an arbitrary and solipsist declaration of reality. Post-factuality negates fundamental consenses on which societal coherence in general and especially
in academia are based, it negates discourse (sensu Habermas) as the only legitimate means of societal dispute and it negates
that all humans are fundamentally equal in their abilities of understanding.
The actual post-factual battle is a strive for hegemony in the facts-discourse. It is a political and ethical decision whether we
prefer the intersubjectivity of empiricism as a common ground of societal coherence or the autocratic and hegemonial claims of
individual despotism. Thus post-factualism is primarily a political problem. The battle between factualism and post-factualism,
however, blinds out that the idea of “facts” in itself is a specifically modern and western European way to produce absolute
truth, to reduce contingency and to silence divergent argumentations. The notion of facts itself already establishes inequality
between actors of different world-views.
