MAKING HERITAGES TOWARDS AD2500: ARCHAEOLOGY AS RECONNECTIONS TO OBJECTS, HERITAGE
AS REMEMBERING THINGS
Author(s): Yoshida, Yasuyuki (Center for Cultural Resource Studies, Kanazawa University; Sainsbury Institute for the Study of
Japanese Arts and Cultures)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper is looking at discourses on nuclear power plants and radioactive waste repositories before and after the Great East
Japan Earthquake 2011 include a conceptual-designed stone coffin shape nuclear power plant built in Tokyo Bay, art-installations within contaminated areas, and proposals to build tourism sites near the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. Through
the review of the discourses, this paper is thinking of intrinsic features of archaeological thoughts, the conception of heritage,
and the possibilities of archaeology and heritage in the distant future. We are using archaeological imaginations to think about
objects and landscapes in very different ways from those of our everyday experiences. Therefore, one of the most popular areas
of archaeology is still prehistory. Prehistoric objects are most stimulating archaeological imaginations. Archaeological practices
might be situated as trials to re-connect objects of the remote past to the “current us” somehow. In AD 2500, some objects of
the 21st century that are familiar with us would become subjects of archaeology. On the other hand, making heritage might be
situated as trials to allow our inheritors to keep connections to heritage and remember social things through heritage. Nuclear
power plants, radioactive waste repositories, and sites of nuclear accidents are likely to become subjects of archaeology in the
distant future. Some radioactive waste repositories are planned to be built isolated deep underground, and there are discussions
about how to communicate this danger to people in the distant future in verbal, non-verbal, and symbolic ways. Those ideas are
premised upon the idea that radioactive waste repositories would become subjects of archaeology. The contrasting idea insists
that nuclear facilities should be built-in our society not in isolated forms for remembering them.
