ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS REGARDING DONATED SKELETAL COLLECTIONS
Author(s): Maijanen, Heli (University of Oulu) - Steadman, Dawnie (University of Tennessee)
Presentation Format: Oral
Biological anthropologists and bioarchaeologists study human skeletal remains in various contexts. Research is commonly conducted using skeletal collections, which can originate from archaeological sites without known identity of the deceased or they
can be from identified (documented) collections with varying degrees of information on the individuals. Documented collections
can constitute of remains from cadavers, historical or contemporary cemeteries, or donation programs.
No skeletal collection is free from ethical concerns, even though the type of issues may vary depending on the origins of the
remains. Some of the most profound issues are the right to burial, consent to study and the anonymity of the deceased. Contemporary whole body donations are usually self-donated (willed while living) or donated by family members after death. In either
scenario, not all family members may be supportive of body donation and requests may be made to return the remains. From a
research perspective, the curators of body donation collections must protect the anonymity of the donors whilst encouraging
free access to qualified researchers. Anonymity is becoming more difficult as new technologies emerge, such as genetic sequencing, genotype/phenotype studies, digitization, biometrics, and medical devices, which may directly or indirectly divulge
the identity of the donor or, in the case of genetics, the identity of family members. Curators must also consider the long-term
impact of destructive analysis requests, particularly to limited resources such as teeth. Finally, data sharing policies that explicitly state the expectations and limitations of data use are critical to ensuring fair and ethical dissemination of data and results
among researchers. This presentation will demonstrate many of the ethical dimensions of body donation using a large, contemporary donated skeletal collection, The W. M. Bass Donated Skeletal Collection as an example.
