ARCHAEO-METALLURGICAL ANALYSIS: A STUDY OF THE METALLURGY IN EARLY MEDIEVAL SOCIETIES
IN WEST BENGAL
Author(s): Chatterjee, Anustup (Techno International Newtown)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeo-metallurgy is an interdisciplinary field of study that examines all aspects of the production, use and consumption of
metals. This discipline has been concerned explicitly with materiality & characteristic of ancient metal objects and identification
of their unique features across time and space.
Archaeo-metallurgical study in early medieval Bengal traces the history and development of metalwork. West Bengal as an integral part of eastern India has a very old tradition of iron technology, as indicated by the metal objects obtained from various
archaeological sites. All materials collected from these archaeological sites in West Bengal prove that the ancient alchemy and
metallurgical science practiced in this region were rich and vast. The detailed description of metallurgical processes and intricate properties of minerals and chemicals in the 10th-11th century alchemy-text, referred in the Rasaratna Samuchchaya is yet
another proof of the high level of knowledge of metallurgy. Metals have a very close relationship with human civilization and the
phases attributed to different stages of cultural growth are dominated by the metals being used at a particular period.
Metal objects found from various early medieval sites of West Bengal provide a unique opportunity to study the development of
metalworking fashion and technology. A number of excavations & explorations have been conducted to investigate the societal
structure and material culture of this period. The study of metal technology also helps us to know the cultural development and
craftsmanship.
The present study involves scientific analysis of metal objects obtained from two very culturally rich archaeological sites
Kankandighi and Moghalmari in West Bengal. It will also highlight the archaeo-metallurgical perspectives and character as revealed by the samples collected from excavated sites. Upon performing different test on the collected samples, the results
would give a clear picture regarding the purity of the metal used for different purpose.
