ARCHAEOLOGICAL GEOPHYSICS AT CHRISTIANSBORG/OSU, GHANA
Author(s): Callanan, Martin (Dept of Historical Studies, NTNU Norwegian University of Science and Technology) - Breivik, Heidi
- Stamnes, Arne (Dept of Archaeology and Cultural History, NTNU University Museum)
Presentation Format: Oral
Many forts and castles from the transatlantic slave trade are preserved along the coast of West Africa. Christiansborg Castle,
lying on the coast of Ghana, is a well-preserved castle from this period that is designated as a UNESCO heritage site. It has had a
complex history that continues up until today. The Castle served as the headquarters for the Danish-Norwegian engagement in
the transatlantic slave trade, between the mid-1650s until 1850. Following a period of British colonial rule, the Castle complex
was further developed and expanded as a Ghanaian government complex that is still in use. The site comprises of the castle
itself, including its’ different extensions, as well as the castle grounds and a number of different associated sites (houses, gardens etc.) in the near vicinity.
Much is known about the appearance and development of the castle and surrounding buildings during certain periods from the
many documents, paintings and images that are preserved until today. And the area has been the object of heritage and surface
surveys. In addition, limited archaeological excavations are currently being carried out within the Castle grounds, by a Ghanaian
project.
Despite this, many basic questions remain about the nature and extension of the settlement that surrounded Christiansborg.
Similarly, the precise past location of several key sites that are today absent has not been established.
In this presentation, we report the results of a recent geophysical survey, carried out at Christiansborg in November 2018. The
survey was a limited pilot survey: But the results and experiences, produced are relevant both for the historical archaeology of
the region, as well as for discussions regarding the potentials and problems associated with applying geophysics on sites in the
region.
