WHY WE NEED A SPATIAL DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR ARCHAEOLOGY
Author(s): McKeague, Peter (HES Historic Environment Scotland)
Presentation Format: Oral
Through the INSPIRE Directive (2007) public organisations across Europe are required to share environmentally-related spatial
datasets to support decision making and management of the environment. As a result heritage agencies responsible for the
designation and management of Protected Sites across Europe have released Web Map and Web Feature Services through the
INSPIRE Geoportal.
However there is no requirement to collate, manage or share spatial data created through fieldwork. As a result there is often
little or no consistency across data created from separate fieldwork projects and the data is not easily accessible or reusable
beyond the lifespan of the project. At best the data, often only the project report, may be deposited as part of a project archive.
However, too often the spatial data – site locations, geophysical survey grids, excavation trenches etc - is fossilised in the pages
of the report severely constraining the ability to reuse and combine data from different projects. There is often little consistency
in both the data structure attribution from different projects, hindering efficient reuse. For more specialist data, such as remote
sensing datasets, the technical metadata required to assess the data quality is incomplete or in pdf format. Data rights may also
inhibit reuse. Can the data be reused without infringing the Intellectual Property Rights and copyright of the depositor or third
party data (such as background mapping). There are also questions of who should collate, manage and publish spatial datasets,
functions outside the remit of traditional archives.
This paper will explore the challenges and opportunities presented by spatial data from archaeological projects. In proposing that
we need to think beyond individual projects to make efficient use of the spatial data we create, we need to consider the potential
value to be gained and benefits from managing spatial data more effectively.
