RIGHT OR WRONG? ETHIC ISSUES IN THE MUSEALISATION OF HUMAN REMAINS FROM LEOPOLICENCELLE (VITERBO, ITALY)
Author(s): Crescenzi, Nicole (Sapienza University of Rome) - Baldoni, Marica - Martinez-Labarga, Cristina (University of Rome
Tor Vergata) - Stasolla, Francesca Romana (Sapienza University of Rome)
Presentation Format: Oral
“Why excavate skeletons? What information can we obtain that justify the disturbance of human interments?”1. In the ongoing
debate over the disposition and scientific analysis of ancient human remains, the ethical issues surrounding skeletal research,
evolutionary medicine and the maintenance of skeletal collection tend to be reduced to simplistic oppositions: science vs religion, right vs wrong, etc. Even the exhibition of human remains represents a strongly debated and controversial subject. Many
ethical issues have been brought up, concerning the right preservation of human remains, the respectful treatment they should
receive, but also which will be the reactions and feelings their display could raise in their descendants and in the public in general2-3. From a scientific point of view, the analysis of human skeletal remains represent a unique source of information enhancing
our understanding of human evolution and histories with both local and global implications4.
Human skeletal remains are considered part of the cultural heritage defined for the first time in 1954 in the Convention of Aja
and then by the UNESCO in 1970 as “every artifacts or natural/biological formation considered important for religious, archaeological, historical, artistic and scientific purposes”5.
In order to try to solve some of the ethical issues raised, guidelines have been created for museum curators to follow6. In particular, a policy of cooperation with known descendants is strongly suggested, to ensure the right preservation and a respectful,
professional and rightfully contextualized exhibition.
The present study will present the afford to solve ethic problematics in a real multidisciplinary case study related to the analysis
and the exhibit of a sample of human skeletal remains from the archaeological site of Leopoli-Cencelle (Viterbo, Italy).
