BEHIND THE LOIRE VALLEY CASTLES CLICHÉS: THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL REALITY OF THE MEDIEVAL
CASTLE OF GIEN (FRANCE)
Author(s): Bizri, Melinda (UMR 6298 Artehis / University of Burgundy) - Labille, Magali (Department of Loiret) - Borderie, Quentin (UMR 7041 Arscan / University of Paris I -Nanterre)
Presentation Format: Oral
The medieval castle of Gien is a great well-conserved monument of the Loire Valley (France), but it reflects a paradox. This castle
houses heritage collections of the National museum of hunting disconnected from the history of the place. Until recent archaeological researches, the context of edification of the castle and its medieval origins were unknown and dealt more with imagination than with scientific knowledge.
However, the chance of a refurbishing project (from 2011 to 2014) focused the reflection on the castle itself because of the
repair of a lot of its building’s materials. Archaeology studies of the site came through this project because the owner of the site
- the Department of Loiret - has its own archeological service, able to handle this type of mission.
The results of such an archaeological support largely exceeded our expectations. The period from the 9th to the 11th century
was excavated while only an occupation of the 13th-15th century was expected; new observations were made thanks to geoarchaeological and environmental studies.
This was allowed by discussing with the craftsmen working in architectural restoration and the decision-makers of heritage cultural policy, in order to minimize the impact of the transformations on the comprehension of the monument.
After the achievement of archaeological excavations and studies and after the end of the constructions works, different projects are still in progress. Some are addressed to a scientific audience but the promotion of this rich historical and archaeological
context to the general public continue to be carried out: an exhibition of the archaeological work will be held in 2020 inside the
museum. This kind of actions highlights the various and large possibilities of contributions that this kind of experience can create, by connecting people to their cultural heritage.
