BRONZE AGE TRANSFORMATIONS, LONG DISTANCE EXCHANGE AND GUEST-FRIENDSHIP
Author(s): Kaul, Flemming - Frei, Karin (The National Museum of Denmark)
Presentation Format: Oral
Imported objects are often seen as a main stimulus in the creation of new types. The creative process of transformation may
have taken place somewhere in between the primary sources of inspiration and the areas where new types turned up, here swiftly spreading in new and translated shape. The appearance of the one-edged razor with horse headed handle in South Scandinavia
shortly before 1400 BC provides an example. The Nordic razors are one-edged and asymmetrical, whereas other European razors
of the time are two-edged and symmetrical, except for Aegean/Minoan razors. The Nordic razors are smaller than their Mediterranean prototypes. Whereas the handle with its horse’s head is fully cast on the Nordic razors, the handle of the Aegean razors is
flanged, being partially of organic material. Still, the full shape of the handle is visible on votive razors from the Dicte Cave, Crete.
Recent developments in strontium isotope analyses have allowed scientists to trace the mobility of single individuals in detail. Some individuals buried in Denmark (14th Millennium BC) stayed for long time far from here, probably Central Europe. Lead
isotope analyses evidence that copper extracted in the Alps, reached South Scandinavia. The most distant connections are
demonstrated by glass beads, turning up in the North c. 1400 BC, coming from Egypt and Mesopotamia.
The ancient Greek (and Homeric) concept of guest-friendship, xenia, may give us an idea of the social mechanisms that would
make long distance exchange practically feasible. Xenia was a concept of hospitality and friendship of individuals of non-related
groups and was a moral and religious obligation of hospitality securing food and accommodation to travellers. Some stations on
the routes could be in the Alps, where dialogues and exchange of ideas took place while feasting and drinking practices according
to the rules of xenia were respected.
