INVESTIGATION OF ANCIENT MICROSCOPIC HUMAN INDUCED SOIL POLLUTION: HOW PAST HUMAN
ACTIVITIES IMPACTED SOIL CHEMISTRY, STILL AFFECTING OUR ENVIRONMENT
Author(s): Save, Sabrina (Amélie SARL)
Presentation Format: Oral
All human activity generates waste and pollutes the environment. The waste of the distant past is the stuff of everyday archaeological investigation: broken pieces of ceramic vessels, cut animal bones and rich organic sediments filling abandoned storage
pits. In other words, the trash people produce. These anthropogenic wastes are also incorporated into the earthen floors of buildings, the natural surfaces around settlements, and the fields from which people obtained their food. Derived from this waste and
its interaction with the sediments on/in which it is deposited, a wide range of chemicals penetrate, contaminate and transform,
in others words pollute, those same sediments where people once lived and carried out their daily activities. While environmental
pollution is a recent, central concern, increasingly affecting our present society, archaeologists did not start to consider ancient,
much less microscopic, pollution until very recently. While ongoing research has begun to construct theoretical models explaining what kinds of human activity translates into a certain chemical imprint, no convincing coherent model yet exists.
In this paper, we will present our research project which uses geochemical surveying of extensive areas to acquire a more global
view of palaeo-pollution and the human impact on soil chemistry at the landscape level. Our aim is to trace past polluting human
activities in four dimensions - across landscapes and over time. The study of ancient societies can serve as pertinent lessons to
understand the present world and anticipate the potential consequences of human actions. By modelling how ancient pollutants
materialise and evolve in soils after centuries of taphonomic processes, archaeology can contribute to contemporary society,
helping us assess the long-term impact of our own pollution and design sustainable policies to prevent present human actions
from unbalancing the cycle of life.
