ELECTIVE AFFINITIES: THE PRAXIS OF BECOMING, REVOLUTIONARY PESSIMISM AND RESISTANCE
Author(s): Alves - Ferreira, Joana (CEAACP, University of Coimbra)
Presentation Format: Oral
“Nothing is more foreign to the melancholic revolutionary than a paralyzing faith in inevitable progress and guaranteed future.
Although they are pessimists, they refuse to surrender, to give in. Their utopia is the principle of resistance to inevitable catastrophe.” (Löwy 2009: 10)
The proposition of this session opens on a double question: “Is Archaeology Practical? to which follows “Can Archaeology become a place of resistance in terms of becoming revolutionary and becoming ethical?” The two questions are closely linked and
both aspire to, and create, the possibility of transformation. In other words, the praxis of “becoming-other”.
To address and respond to the demands required by those questions we aim to suggest links of elective affinities that can be
drawn between Gilles Deleuze’s concept of becoming, Walter Benjamin’s active – ‘organized’ – practical pessimism, Rosa Luxemburg’s “Socialism or Barbarism” formula, along with Gordon Childe’s archaeological thought of revolutionary change.
For Deleuze the concept of becoming is both the creative force and the actual practice for mediating a dynamic event across
different temporalities and different geographies. It is then an inventive practice of the creation of new concepts and meanings
– that are yet to come – as the praxis of ‘what could be’ and therefore as future-oriented ethics.
For this purpose, to mark the 100th anniversary of her brutal murder, we recall Rosa Luxemburg’s revolutionary formula – Socialism or Barbarism – which dialectically interrupts the inevitability of the process of historical evolution, opening the possibility for
other-stories as other-choices to be negotiated, while seeking to creatively perform a dialogue with Childe’s notion of revolutionary change as the praxis for creating discontinuity – interruption and possibility – in the continuum of the historical fabric. In the
background, “pessimism all along the line”. The way Benjamin defined to prevent us from withering away.
