MANAGEMENT OF UNDERWATER CULTURAL HERITAGE IN FLANDERS (BELGIUM)
Author(s): Vandevelde, Jessica - Pieters, Marnix - Demerre, Ine (Flanders Heritage Agency) - Van Haelst, Sven (Flanders Marine
Institute)
Presentation Format: Oral
Belgium has only a limited shoreline and is therefore only responsible for a limited part of the North Sea. Nonetheless, several
hundred wreck sites have been identified, dating from the 16th century to the 1970’s. The seabed itself is an archeological, or
rather paleo-geological feature, as it was once dry land, a fertile and inhabited prehistoric landscape of which large parts have
been preserved.
Belgium has ratified the Unesco convention on underwater cultural heritage in 2013 on behalf of its different regions and communities. The country’s political organization however creates a rather interesting situation. Heritage management and research, including archaeology, is a regional responsibility. But the North Sea, being of national importance and not belonging to
one of the regions, is predominantly under federal jurisdiction. Including in relation to underwater cultural heritage. This means
that Flemish institutions like the Flanders Heritage Agency and the Flanders Marine Institute can do research at sea, but do not
have any direct means of managing underwater heritage, through legislation etc. For the federal government, archaeology is not
its core business. They do however take up this responsibility, in close collaboration with the Flanders Heritage Agency and the
Flanders Marine Institute.
In recent years these institutes have been involved in several international and multi-disciplinary research projects, and have
invested in field surveys and in updating inventories. This has resulted in a much improved dataset, a better understanding of the
geology of the seabed, but most importantly in improved legislation on the protection of known wreck sites.
In the years to come, we will continue our research and our efforts to improve the management of maritime cultural heritage,
both at sea, along the shoreline and in and along our rivers.
