GROWING EAST ASIAN MILLETS: EXPERIMENTAL AND MORPHOLOGICAL STUDIES ON FOXTAIL MILLET (SETARIA ITALICA) AND RELATED WEEDY TAXA
Author(s): Lee, Gyoung-Ah - Vaughn, Maria - Kneisly, Angelica (University of Oregon)
Presentation Format: Oral
Millet is a vernacular name given to various small-grain crops with wide geographic origins. Among them, two northeast Asian
varieties, foxtail (Setaria italica ssp. italica) and broomcorn or proso millets (Panicum miliaceum), are a few of the earliest staples,
dating back to the Early Holocene. Initially being domesticated by ~9000 cal. BP along the Hwanghe (Yellow) River, they spread
westward to Europe by 3500 cal. BP, and eastward to Korea by 7500–7000 cal. BP, and to Japan by ~5000 BP. Archaeological
works on millets have mostly focused on when and where the earliest evidence appeared or the impact of millet farming to a
rising social complexity. We intend to turn an attention to an agro-ecological aspect of ruderal taxa, leading evidence for apprehending the traditional farming methods and its impact on local vegetation. Our approach is twofold: to implement an experiment
of growing heirloom varieties of foxtail millet in a greenhouse; and to document various morphologies of charred seeds that are
identified to Panicoid (subfamily Panicoideae). By limiting any artificial aid to growing conditions in a minimum level, we attempt
to replicate prehistoric cultivation conditions and to observe the growth of foxtail millet. A diversity of shapes and sizes of Panicoid seeds often adds a difficulty to identify them to a species level in archaeological assemblages. Even with an entire plant
specimen, the species-level identification of these taxa is known to be demanding, due to their frequent interbreeding within the
same genus and a high plasticity of their phenotypes. This study will document phenotypes of Panicoid seed remains from the
Yiluo Region of China and compare them to our harvests from the greenhouse to develop a sensible qualitative and quantitative
criteria for classification of various ancient millet-related remains.
