POTTERY TRADITION IN TRANSITION? THE PASSAGE FROM THE EARLY TO THE MIDDLE NEOLITHIC
PERIOD AT ILINDENTSI, SOUTHWEST BULGARIA
Author(s): Dzhanfezova, Tanya (University of Oxford) - Grębska-Kulowa, Małgorzata (Blagoevgrad Historical Museum)
Presentation Format: Oral
There is gradual continuity between the Early and the Middle Neolithic period at the site of Ilindentsi, Southwest Bulgaria. Dated
to the mid 6th millennium BC, this settlement is an excellent example for the delicate modification of some of the earlier technological approaches and styles of local ceramic production. The continuation of such well established Early Neolithic techniques,
combined with the initial markers of the newly shaped Middle Neolithic style, allows for the identification of a transitional and
possibly experimental phase, or at least a potential series of exploratory technological attempts.
This paper is focused on the seemingly irrational amalgam of elements typical for the two consecutive periods. The novel dark
and shiny polished style which became characteristic for the entire region of the Middle Neolithic Balkan peninsula is in sharp
contrast with the main decorative approach from the developed phase of the Early Neolithic period. Interestingly, the desired
dark surface has sometimes been achieved by adaptation of earlier techniques. There is also cases of irrational application of
engobe on otherwise black polished surfaces. Furthermore, often the combinations between the old and the new elements do
not meet the expectations for high-quality sharp colour contrast, established in the earlier stages of the painted tradition. These
diverging variations of the technological choices and especially the pigmentation effects are in contrast with the otherwise
strict stylistic formulae practiced in the Early Neolithic period.
The focus here is on the reasoning behind the incorporation of earlier decorative elements into the newly shaped pottery styles
and fashions. The possible causes for the seemingly illogical technological decisions are examined in details by multistrand analysis. The ceramic material from this settlement thus represents excellent example for the trial and error in times of transition.
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 798143.
