PLANKS, BEAMS AND PILES: WOODEN STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS FROM LUCONE DI POLPENAZZE
(BRESCIA, ITALY)
Author(s): Mangani, Claudia (Museo Civico Archeologico) - Baioni, Marco (Museo Archeologico della Valle Sabbia - Gavardo) Martinelli, Nicoletta - Pignatelli, Olivia (Laboratorio Dendrodata - Verona)
Presentation Format: Oral
Lucone di Polpenazze is one of the small basins of the Garda morainic amphitheatre (BS-ITA). The site is a part of the transnational UNESCO site “Prehistoric Pile dwellings around the Alps”.
The site, known locally since the XIXth century, was rediscovered in the 60s of the XXth century. Surface research has identified
at least five different sites. Between 1965 and 1971 the site A was investigated. Site D, discovered in 1986, has been the subject of research undertaken since 2007 by the Museo della Valle Sabbia. The excavation campaigns permitted the investigation
of an area covering 190 m2 (Sector 1), with a recent enlargement of 153 m2 (Sector 2) which is still in course of excavation.
Lucone D was a smaller, shorter-lived settlement, compared with A site. The building construction episodes were dated through
dendrochronology: felling dates were identified between 2034 and 1967 cal BC in the first part of the EBA-EBA1 in Italian Chronology). The first phase ended with a big fire that led to houses’ collapse.
The particular situation determined by the fire and the general conditions of the site (a anoxic context with high humidity) allowed
the preservation of many wooden elements both vertical and horizontal. They were subjected to wood and dendrochronological
analyses that allowed their dating and the identification of the tree species used.
The study of all the elements allowed to recognize different types of wooden artefacts: deck planks, roof beams, probable parts
of the walls. Particularly interesting are various types of beams with quadrangular holes, some probably pile-shoes, others are
more difficult to interpret like the two long beams (8m) with 25 holes, found in the part of the settlement towards the lake. Purpose of this paper is to try to hypothesize the huts’shape and the use of individual wooden elements.
