SPATIAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL HYPOTHESES – A VISUALISATION METHOD AS CRUCIAL
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONTRIBUTION
Author(s): Lengyel, Dominik (BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg) - Toulouse, Catherine (Lengyel Toulouse Architects)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeology is the base for our self-awareness. This also concerns our built environment. Agglomeration from villages to
metropoles and habitats from huts to palaces influence our relation to the environment and human behaviour in general. The
culturally transmitted knowledge of co-living in agglomerations is one of the major achievements of mankind. Yet, spatial archaeological hypotheses are rarely communicated like architecture in contemporary discourses. Instead, archaeological sites
are visualized as they might have appeared in their appropriate time. This way, the outcome of urban and building archaeology
loses its relevance for today. One way of raising the value and public utility of archaeology concerning the built environment is
to emphasize the intellectual achievements of lost architecture by abstracting as much of the time-referenced features in the
visualisation and instead concentrating on the spatial relations of buildings and building parts. This way, traditional roots are
made visible, the way knowledge in conceiving settlements has been transmitted to us through centuries is made visible. There
is much more in common between archaeological metropoles and today’s urban planning than asssumed, even if both adapted
changing circumstances. Classical composition rules survived as human societies continuously developed over centuries. By
uncovering their relation to us, archaeological research does make a crucial contribution. This requires a method for visualizing
architecture that literally translates archaeological hypotheses into visual representations working primarily with abstraction.
The presentation illustrate this method by several projects developed by the authors in their University Chair and in their architectural office in cooperation with archaeological research institutions like Cologne Cathedral and its Predecessors (by order of
and exhibited in Cologne Cathedral), The Metropolis of Pergamon (within the German Research Fund Excellence Cluster TOPOI)
and The Palatine Palaces (by order of the German Archaeological Institute, both latter exhibited in the Pergamon Museum Berlin).
