MUSSOLINI AND THE EVOLUTION OF ITALIAN CULTURAL HERITAGE LEGAL DEVELOPMENT: A PARADOX
Author(s): Karabaich, Kassandra (Independent)
Presentation Format: Oral
By and large, cultural heritage laws developed in greater strength and numbers during the second half of the twentieth century
– due in no small part to the 1954 Hague Convention – even though key players in European politics such as France, Spain and
Belgium had developed legal systems and well documented concern for the health of the national arts.
Italian legal development, however, was ahead of its time concerning such matters with legal policies put in place to enforce
cultural preservation policies as early as 1907 (no. 386) – which set Superintendencies in place – and was further strengthened
with the establishment of policies regarding antiquites, fine arts and conservation codes in 1909 (no. 364).
Crucially, the most effective legal cultural policies were developed in Italy during the 20th century under the dictatorship of Benito Mussolini. Superintendencies increased in great number and specific function in 1923 and were later corrected by the even
more influential law no. 1089 in June of 1939, which, most crucially, took into account the commonalities between the protection
of cultural heritage and the advancement of the public good and private interests.
I would like to propose an overview of the ways in which the implementation of cultural heritage legal policies under Mussolini
both complemented his wish to incite nationalistic ideologies under his regime as well as how these policies were formulated
to simultaneously allow the destruction of choice cultural heritage in the name of the new Fascist state. This Italian case study
is even more interesting given its stark contrast in legal heritage development in comparison to its allies during WWII. In doing
so, the discussion will also serve as a necessary asterisk that highlights the law’s role in larger questions regarding how cultural
heritage management can both prevent and contribute to political regimes.
