ARCHAEOLOGY AND ITS REDISTRIBUTIONS. AND YET IT MOVES!
Author(s): Gomes, Sergio (CEAACP - University of Coimbra) - Gameiro, Cristina (UNIARQ - University of Lisbon) - Nóbrega, Pedro (Sever do Vouga Museum; IEM-NOVA FCSH)
Presentation Format: Oral
The study of past remains is a work of redistribution, demanding the mobilization of things, people and ideas and the construction of new spaces for the entities emerging in this process (De Certeau 1982; Lucas 2012). As such, archaeological research
is a place of practical invention: recreating the conditions for past remains to exist in the present; transforming the conditions
in which archaeologists and other communities work and live together. Archaeology is an ecology of practices in which the care
of things activates the care of other agents (Olsen et al 2012). This paper will focus on the dynamics of the research in which
three prehistoric sites located in the Vouga river valley (Portugal) were studied. The study is now being undertaken by teams
working in preventive/commercial archaeology, research-oriented archaeology and heritage management services. However,
at the beginning of the project, these dynamics were different. A conflict of interests – inherent in how preventive/commercial
archaeology has been managed in Portugal – was creating a circuit of social/economic and research exclusion, leading to adverse
working contexts for archaeologists. To combat this, more agents were needed to be added to the process in order to enlarge the
possibility of studying the sites. In discussing this, we will emphasize how the economic and social conditions framing archaeological research create circuits of exclusion/inclusion and how archaeologists – as ethical and political agents – may act upon
those conditions; resisting to, and transforming, the circuits in which they become archaeologists.
De Certeau, M. (1988), The Writing of History, trans. Tom Conley, New York: Columbia University Press.
Lucas, G. (2012), Understanding the Archaeological Record, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Olsen, B., M. Shanks, T. Webmoor and C. Witmore, (2012), Archaeology. The Discipline of Things, Berkeley: University of California
Press.
