DENTAL MICROWEAR ANALYSIS AS AN INDICATOR OF THE DIET: CASE STUDY OF A 17TH CENTURY
NECROPOLIS FROM IAȘI, ROMANIA
Author(s): Petraru, Ozana-Maria (Romanian Academy – Iasi Branch, “Olga Necrasov” Center of Anthropological Research; “Alexandru Ioan Cuza” University of Iaşi, Faculty of Biology) - Groza, Vasilica-Monica - Popovici, Mariana (Romanian Academy – Iasi
Branch, “Olga Necrasov” Center of Anthropological Research) - Bejenaru, Luminița (Romanian Academy – Iasi Branch, “Olga
Necrasov” Center of Anthropological Research; “Alexandru Ioan Cuza” University of Iaşi, Faculty of Biology)
Presentation Format: Poster
In 2008, during a rescue archaeological excavation in Iaşi (Iaşi County, Romania), a necropolis of 17th century was discovered.
From the necropolis were recovered 111 well-preserved skeletons, generating interest for a dietary study. Dental microwear has
been used in attempts to characterize diet and it refers to the microscopic marks left on the enamel and dentine which reflects
the mechanical properties of food and abrasives consumed in the weeks or months before death.
The aim of the present study is to characterize the dental microwear in order to approach the past peoples dietary related to
environmental context and cultural hierarchy. The second molar (M2) was chosen for analysis. The contaminants were previously removed from dental surface in a supersonic cleaner. After a gold coating procedure, three micrographs were taken upon
the paracon/paraconid with a Tescan Vega II SBH scanning electronic microscope (SEM) at an acceleration voltage of 30 kV. On
each digitized micrograph, micromorphological features such as small pits, large pits, fine scratches and coarse scratches were
analysed through MicroWear R package. Our results reveal a significant high number of scratches compared to the number of
pits (p<0.01) examined on the occlusal surfaces, in both males and females. The number of fine scratches is related with soft
food, a high component of meat or processed food; although the scratches are predominantly, the presence of pits may induce
a mixed dietary.
