LARGE GAME HUNTING STRATEGIES IN THE MIDDLE PALAEOLITHIC OF SOUTHERN FRANCE:CONTRIBUTION OF DENTAL CEMENTUM ANALYSIS AT CANALETTES AND LAZARET SITES
Author(s): Roussel, Audrey (Université Côté d’Azur; CEPAM; Région Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur) - Gourichon, Lionel (Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, CEPAM; CEPAM, CNRS) - Valensi, Patricia (Musée de Préhistoire de Tourrette-Levens; CNRS, HNHP) - Brugal, Jean-Philip (Aix-Marseille Université; CNRS, LAMPEA)
Presentation Format: Poster
The present paper aims to approach the subsistence systems, mobility and settlement patterns of Neandertal or pre-Neandertal in Southern France, focusing on hunting strategies. Recent zooarchaeological studies undertaken on several French Middle
Palaeolithic sites have questioned previous models implying opportunistic large game exploitation and highlighted more complex food procurement strategies (collective and specialized hunting, meat storage and deferred consumption, etc.). However,
this topic research remains limited due to the small number of sites carefully studied as well as the scarcity of high-resolution
data. In this perspective, we propose to assess two main parameters: the demographic composition of the hunted animal populations and the seasonality of their acquisition. Both are critical to address mobility and settlements patterns of human groups.
We present here the preliminary results of the analysis of two archaeological contexts from Southern France: the layer UA29
of Lazaret cave on the Mediterranean coast (MIS6, Nice, Alpes-Maritimes) and layer 4 of the rockshelter site of Les Canalettes
located in the mid-altitude zone of Causse du Larzac (MIS5a, Aveyron). This study focused on dental remains of red deer, ibex
and large bovine (bison/aurochs), is based on traditional methods of age and season at death estimation (i.e. tooth eruption and
wear), as well as dental cementum increment analysis.
Issues about the methodological limitations encountered in this study, particularly related with tooth preservation (macro- and
micro-taphonomy), will be discussed. They will contribute to improve and adapt the sampling and cementum analytical protocols
which can be applied to other Middle Palaeolithic contexts. The preliminary results already allow us to explore hypotheses about
the functions and seasonality of the occupations and to conduct future comparative studies on Neandertal subsistence behaviours.
