SOME THEORETICAL APPROACHES TO STUDYING GENDER IN GANDHARA ART
Author(s): Lakshminarayanan, Ashwini (University of Rome La Sapienza)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Northwestern corner of the Indian Subcontinent – where the School of Gandhara Art arose – is a crucial crossroad in the
frame of Early Historic Globalisation. Gandharan sculptures are a major source for analysing fundamental questions regarding
gendered depictions in the subcontinent. Due to the multicultural environment in Gandhara (from Hellenistic, Persian, Roman and
local cultures), there is an easy tendency to undervalue the contributions of non-western cultures to its art and to over-emphasize the role of literary sources as a key tool to understand gender relations in ancient Gandhara.
The foremost view on gender relations – “male dominance over female” – in Gandhara (and ancient India) has been derived mainly
from literary sources. Images of female figures were used to relate to the themes discussed in literary texts, but so far they did
not deserve independent study. However narrative scenes also depict powerful women, subversive femininity, female sexuality
and compromised masculinity through a range of characters. Although these images are not a direct mirror reflection of society,
their symbolic meaning reveals “common ideologies” embedded in them regarding gender relations.
My aim in this paper is to provide an overview of theoretical approaches to understand gender relations as depicted in Gandhara
art from the 1st to the 4th century A.D. During this period, Buddhist art integrated pre-existing Hindu views on gender relations
while simultaneously adapting to the multicultural community that is vital for its survival. This was a direct consequence of
ancient globalisation. Using postmodern theoretical approaches in the study of Gandhara art within its context, this paper will
attempt to understand the multiple ideological underpinnings in the interpretation of visual arts and the impact of a multicultural
environment on the artistic production in order to develop a research pattern to study gender in Gandhara art.
