WEAPONS, GOLD AND MONUMENTS – THE EMERGENCE OF EARLY BRONZE AGE RULING ELITES IN
CENTRAL GERMANY
Author(s): Meller, Harald (State Office for Heritage Management and Archaeology Saxony-Anhalt)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Early Bronze Age of Central Germany is based on the fundaments of the late Neolithic cultures of the 3rd millennium BC.
Initially, the central German group of the Únětice Culture still shows Neolithic characteristics and rare metal goods. A sudden
appearance of large quantities of bronze in hoards, as well as distinctions between burial equipment, indicate a radical social
change at the transition to the second millennium (BrzA2 or Period I of the Northern Bronze Age) and testify to the extraordinary
wealth in the region between the river Saale and the Harz mountains.
The funeral rites now illustrate a highly stratified society with so-called ”princely graves” at the top, monumental burial mounds
with elaborate design and outstanding grave goods that show a specific pattern and refer to Neolithic traditions. Multiple bronze
weapons, gold objects and forging implements stand in sharp contrast to the generally ”simply” equipped flat graves. Due to
the mediating position of the Mittelelbe-Saale region the “princes” were part of a long distance exchange and communication
networks. Thus the people of the Únětice Culture were able to develop control over the transport routes and the North-South
flow of goods.
In 2014 the monumental barrow “Bornhöck” was discovered, even bigger than the princely graves of Leubingen and Helmsdorf. A
further “princely grave” once more draws attention to the social structure of the Early Bronze Age in Central Germany.
The lack of larger settlements or fortifications, the absence of signs of conflict and the long lasting social stability suggest a
legitimised monopoly of power or a complex regulatory mechanism. Assuming this the comparison of the bronzes from tombs
and hoards reveals conspicuous numbers which are similar to those from antique and modern military organisations and leads to
a new approach in Bronze Age studies in Central Europe.
