ASTRONOMICAL ORIENTATION AND LUMINOUS PHENOMENA IN AVENTICUM, THE CAPITAL OF
ANCIENT ROMAN HELVETIA
Author(s): De Franceschini, Marina (Progetto Accademia) - Veneziano, Giuseppe (Astronomical Observatory of Genoa)
Presentation Format: Oral
Since one of the visits planned during this Conference will be in Avenches, I am proposing a presentation on archaeoastronomy
in that town, once the capital of Helvetia.
During the last SIA conference in Genoa (Italy) we presentated the preliminary results of our study. Now we present the final results, showing that the Romans built astronomically oriented cities and buildings with luminous phenomena also in the provinces
of the Empire.
During the visit of the archaeological site of Avenches, the director of the local Museum, Marie-France Krause explained that the
Temple of Cigognier and the Theater were aligned on the same axis, and ritual processions were probably taking place between
the two. This information reminded us of the link between the sanctuaries of Isis and the Theaters, where sacred processions
and representations were held. Perhaps the complex could be astronomically oriented, as are many sanctuaries of goddess Isis.
A first compass measurement on the spot gave encouraging indications, with azimuth values close to those of the sun at Summer Solstice. Those measurements were verified and confirmed by Giuseppe Veneziano, using the satellite images of Google
Earth, which indicated an orientation perfectly matching the sun’s azimuth. Further inquiries and simulations were made with the
software Starry Night pro.
On June 20-21st, 2018 (Summer Solstice) Marina De Franceschini was in Avenches to make on-site observations and verify the
theory. She took pictures at dawn and sunset which confirmed the hypothesis of the astronomical orientation of the complex
formed by the Temple of Cigognier and the Theater, and also of the East and West gates of the city.
The astronomical orientation produced different luminous phenomena which can be related to Roman Imperial cult. This study
hopefully will open the way to new studies and discoveries on this subject, throughout Europe.
