CURATING COHERENCE, DISPLAYING DIFFERENCE: SCALES OF ROMANITAS IN EUROPE
Author(s): Witcher, Robert (Durham University)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Roman past occupies a significant position in European cultural heritage. The legacy of this empire has been drawn upon
by successor states for centuries to legitimise contemporary configurations of power and culture. This establishes the Roman
past as both universal and particular: a shared experience of empire overlain by diverging historical, political and cultural trajectories. This tension has been brought to a head by globalisation, which has simultaneously de-territorialised nation states and
sown the seeds for their revival. Roman cultural heritage provides a lens through which to evaluate this shifting political and
cultural identity-making.
I outline a hypothesis about European museum displays and their relationship with contemporary identities. The collections
displayed in national (primary) museums operate on the global scale, creating a narrative of shared Roman culture epitomised
by objects of the highest quality (marble sculpture, mosaics, public inscriptions), often originally found outside of the national
territory in which they are displayed, plus the best finds from across their home nations. Meanwhile, local (tertiary) museums
concentrate on objects found in their immediate territories, with emphasis on utilitarian and quotidian artefacts such as pottery
and small finds. These museums foster local engagement with the past through tangible material traces of the Roman period
that gain resonance from their local provenance. It is, however, at the regional (secondary) museums that global and local vistion of the Roman past intersect. Free of the global pressures incumbent on national museums, regional museums promote
narratives of hybridity—presenting distinctive geographical manifestations of Roman culture, whether glass-making in Roman
Germany or military culture on the Hadrian’s Wall. It is at this meso-scale that the diversity of the Roman Empire is most visibly
constructed. This paper explores the implications and the possibilities of this hypothesis in the context of the rapidly shifting
political landscapes of Europe.
