POST-MORTEM FETAL EXTRUSION: A CASE STUDY FROM THE CEMETERY AREA OF LEOPOLICENCELLE (VITERBO, ITALY)
Author(s): Baldoni, Marica (University of Rome Tor Vergata) - Stasolla, Francesca Romana (Sapienza University of Rome) - Martinez-Labarga, Cristina (University of Rome Tor Vergata)
Presentation Format: Poster
The vulnerability of young women, often over-represented in archaeological populations, is usually associated with pregnancy
and childbirth. Despite this general assumption however, only several cases of pregnant woman have been documented in archaeological contexts1-12.
In many cases there is a lack of archaeological evidence of maternal and perinatal mortality which is clearly detectable only when
the fetus is retained within the uterus of the mother.
These situations may verify as, suggested before, as a consequence of complications during parturition such as hemorrhage,
prematurity4 and dystocia7-8; 10-12. In some cases, however coffin births have been documented13-17.
How can it happen? The production of gases during the decomposition process causes a significant abdominal swelling which
determine both the increase of intra-abdominal pressure and the relaxation of the soft tissues18. This can result in a pressure
on the uterus causing the expulsion of the fetus19.
During 2017 excavation campaign in the cemetery area of Leopoli-Cencelle (Viterbo, Italy; 9th-15th centuries) a burial of a woman with a fetus between her legs was recovered. The fetus showed a lateral decubitus with the head downwards next to the knee
of his/her mother.
In these cases, in which the fetus is recovered between the legs of a woman it would be worth considering that dead occurred
during pregnancy and not as a consequence of labour complications. The taphonomic analysis, in fact, allow determining the
woman was wrapped in a shroud that could have caused the existence of a sufficient wide space for the extrusion.
This case study represents an important occasion to investigate the maternal causes of death in past populations too often
attributed to childbirth complications without considering other possibilities.
