AN INTERPRETATIVE KEY FOR THE PLURAL APPROPRIATION OF THE CRUX-CENTAURI ALIGNMENT
ACROSS PREHISTORIC EUROPE: A COMPARATIVE REVIEW
Author(s): Cristofaro, Ilaria (University of Wales Trinity Saint David; Astronomical Observatory Sirio, Castellana Grotte) - Balbi,
José (Colchester Archaeological Group; Ministerio de Cultura y Educacion, Argentina)
Presentation Format: Poster
The rising and setting of the Crux-Centauri asterism was embodied in the architectural structures of several cultures across
prehistoric Europe, from Menorca to Malta, from Neolithic Britain to the Funnel Beaker culture, from Sardinia to Daunia (García
Rosselló et al. 2000; Hoskin 2001; Esteban et al. 2001; Belmonte and Hoskin 2002; Zedda and Belmonte 2004; Mann 2010;
González-Garcia and Costa-Ferrer 2003; Antonello et al. 2016). This evidence suggests a plural appropriation of meanings related to this asterism; at the same time a vacuum regarding the interpretation of this stellar alignment for prehistoric societies
can be attested. This is due to a fail, within the discipline of skyscape archaeology, to appreciate the movements of the Milky
Way in respect to the local horizon. As astronomical simulations show, across the different geographical latitudes and the construction times of the archaeological sites under consideration, the Milky Way was seen performing a dramatic oscillation in the
sky related to the Crux-Centuari rising and setting: in just a couple of hours, the galactic circle of light fell down on the west in a
way to lay flat encircling the whole horizon, and raised up from the east (Stellarium 2018). By performing a comparative analysis
of the data, this research argues that the rising and setting of the Crux-Centauri asterism just above the southern horizon was
meaningful since it marked the pivot point of the galactic motion. Thus, this archaeoastronomical alignment may be regarded as
a consistent pattern overlapping different European prehistoric cosmologies beyond their local specificities. The study seeks to
provide a methodological step forward in the possible range of interpretations for archaeoastronomical orientations and the relative determination of intentionality by including considerations on the Milky Way apparent motion, as well as to provide material
evidence for the universality of skyscape narratives within archaeological sites.
