HITTITE DOCUMENTS REFERRING TO CONTEMPORARIES ABROAD - AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS FOR DATING THE TROJAN WAR
Author(s): Giannakos, Konstantinos (Association for the Research of Ancient-Greek and Byzantine Technology)
Presentation Format: Oral
Official diplomatic documents, handed down from the Land-of-Ḫatti, describe the political developments in Anatolia between
17th-12th century BCE -used in correspondence with states adjacent to Ḫatti-, and reflect transnational relations (either peaceful or fierce). The famous documents mentioning Aḫḫiyawa date to the 15th/14th-12th century BCE and yield a valuable Hittite
perspective of international affairs. The contents of these documents are presented in relation to the archaeological evidence
from Egypt, Cyprus, Levant and Greece. Aḫḫiyawa appears to reflect a state on the Greek mainland and some Aegean islands that
is not recorded as such in later Greek literature and most likely reflects Mycenaean Greece. This state assumed an active role in
diplomatic relations across the eastern-Mediterranean from the late-15th century BCE onwards, powerful enough to disturb the
Hittite Kings. Under Ammuna’s reign, during 15th century BCE, the weakened Hittite kingdom was restricted to central Anatolia.
Tudḫaliya I/II expanded their realm westwards. Subsequently, times of weakness alternated with times of strength followed.
Archaeological evidence suggests that during early-LH-1350/1320BCE period, Mycenaeans (i.e. Aḫḫiyawans) enjoyed their
greatest prosperity and power, evidenced by the cutting-edge technological level of archaeological remnants. The ‘Great Powers’, diachronically, use cutting-edge technology to ‘gather-riches’, by gaining military supremacy through their superior-quality
weaponry. Mycenaeans exercised great influence in eastern-Mediterranean through overseas military raids against Anatolia and
Egypt. By 1350/1320BCE, Mycenaean power progressively declined with evidence of increasing Palaces’ destructions and a
“LHIIIA2-LHIIIB Palaces’ cardboard-collapse”.
In this paper, a comparative analysis is presented, drawing from linguistics of personal-names and place-names in Linear B texts
and Hittite and Egyptian records. The ultimate question to be addressed is, whether the recorded raids can be correlated with
any destruction-layer(s) at Troy VI and, of course, whether one of these destruction-layer(s) might indeed reflect what became
known as the Trojan War in ancient lore.
