SILENT COLLECTORS, NOISY COLLECTIONS. TRACING THE PROVENANCE OF ARTIFACTS FROM THE
SEVEREANU ARCHAEOLOGICAL COLLECTION (EARLY 20TH CENTURY, BUCHAREST)
Author(s): Opris, Vasile - Majuru, Adrian - Pirvulescu, Dan (Bucharest Municipality Museum) - Mirea, Dragos - Simion, Corina
(Horia Hulubei National Institute for Physics and Nuclear Engineering)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper aims to trace the provenance of several artefacts and groups of artefacts from Maria and Dr. Severeanu archaeological collection, an impressive variety of objects that comprises over 3000 items from Palaeolithic to the Medieval Ages. The objects were gathered, studied and kept by the Severeanu family in their house in Bucharest at the beginning of the 20th century.
George Severeanu was a reputed radiologist and his wife Maria was a landlord’s daughter and a housewife during their marriage.
Soon after George Severeanu’s death in 1939, the collection was donated by Maria to the Bucharest Municipality Museum and
between 1956 and 1994 the George Severeanu Museum was opened to the public in the collectors’ house. Considering the collectors’ testament request that the whole collection have to be published in specific catalogues, our team began to investigate
the provenance of the objects selected for a first series of publications. Unfortunately, there was little evidence on how the process of collecting was carried out and just scarce information about some of the items provenance was known at that moment.
We started with the study of the few archival documents and publications preserved, but on the way we had to call archaeometry
for help. Chemical and physical analyses, combined in one case with C14 dating were employed. Thus, new valuable, previously
unknown information was gathered. Putting all things together, we managed to detect the origin and the provenance of some of
the analysed items. The revealed stories of the archaeological artefacts bring a major contribution to the understanding of how
a private collection was formed at the beginning of 20th century in Bucharest and also emphasize the social relations between
the collector and contemporary archaeologists.
