ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXCAVATIONS ON THE MODERN CEMETERY AND PROBLEMS OF ITS ORGANIZATION
Author(s): Belyaev, Leonid - Grigoryan, Svetlana (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Poster
Historical necropolis of the Moscow Novo-Devichi Convent of the Smolensk Icon of the Mother of God was organized in 18th –
the early 20th century. The members of famous Russian noble families, military men, scientists, philosophers, poets, merchants
and manufacturers were buried inside the convent walls in the stated period. According to the archive investigations, historical
necropolis by the end of its existences has extended in all sides from the central group of churches to the tens of meters, and
in its south-west part has almost reached the south wall. Archaeological works of 2018 were organized on the convent territory
because of the general program of its reconstruction and alteration of utility services what ultimately resulted in the new era of
the convent investigations. In the course of 2018th field works it was able to manage that almost under upper layer of grass the
grave constrictions of different periods, massive in its size and served as identifiers of the late burials were preserved. In most
cases this constructions covered or partly destroyed each other practically without living vacant space for the archaeologists
to force their way deeper to the cemetery surface. The only way to do this was to break the preserved mason work. At the same
time to demolish the grave constrictions even partly means on some parts of the necropolis to save the separate buildings of the
convent in general. However it possible to do only trough the adaptation of measures of the foundations preservation in course
of vertical planning and engineering works. The current draft took into account the requirements for the protection of architectural monuments and the needs of modern engineering, the exceptional memorial value of the UNESCO monument which the
convent assemblage is and its liturgical functions, as well as the rules governing archaeological work.
