FORGOTTEN CASTLE LANDSCAPES: CONNECTING RESEARCH AND HERITAGE, MONUMENTS AND
LANDSCAPES
Theme: Archaeological heritage and museum management: future chances, future risks
Organisers: Pluskowski, Aleks (Department of Archaeology, University of Reading) - García-Contreras Ruiz, Guillermo (Departamento de Historia Medieval y Ciencias y Técnicas Historiográficas, Universidad de Granada) - Alexander, Michelle (Department of Archaeology, University of York) - Banerjea, Rowena (Department of Archaeology, University of Reading) - GarcíaGarcía, Marcos (Departamento de Historia Medieval y Ciencias y Técnicas Historiográficas, Universidad de Granada)
Format: Regular session
The castles of Europe are dramatic and fundamental interfaces for public understandings of the past. They can be situated
in striking landscapes, which may be designated as national parks or UNESCO geoparks. Whilst both castles and landscapes
attract visitors, they often remain disconnected from each other in terms of scholarly and public understanding. Where these
landscapes functioned at a crucial point in the process of state formation as frontiers – regions created by conquest which absorbed resident populations and supplemented them with migrants – castles were constructed to secure and manage them. The
European heritage sector has promoted these monuments as tourist attractions in varying ways. Many function as public museums, others have passed into private ownership with obligations of retaining some public access. Other still have become hotels
or residences, with varying levels of protection for the monument and buried archaeology. In Iberia, for example, the creation of
Paradors remains one of the most effective government strategies for conserving these monuments and connecting heritage
with local economic growth. However, a crucially important aspect of these sites remains largely neglected – their cultural landscapes. In the last two decades, landscape archaeology has reshaped our understanding of medieval communities, stressing
the connection between places and their associated territories. This has barely been adopted by the European heritage sector.
Where castles were utilised as tools of conquest and colonisation, the cultural landscape provides a fundamental lens on the
impact of imposing a new regime and social norms on the broader population. The aim of this session is to explore how these key
regional monuments can be reconnected with their cultural landscapes, from both research and heritage perspectives. Our hope
