THE USE OF 3D TECHNOLOGIES IN THE STUDY OF CAVE ART IN KAPOVA CAVE
Author(s): Anisovets, Yulia (Lomonosov Moscow State University) - Baskova, Varvara (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences; Lomonosov Moscow State University) - Bakin, Mikhail (Russian Social State University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Kapova cave is situated in the Southern Urals, and it is a unique cave in Russia with reliable Upper Paleolithic wall paintings. It is a
limestone karst cave with three hypsometric levels. Radiocarbon dating of archaeological layers in the cave showed the interval
between 19500 and 16000 BP.
Archaeological excavations have revealed traces of different short-term human activity in the cave, which were expressed in
symbolic and daily practices. 3D-modelling of these findings along with photogrammetry could be applied here to study them
post-factum, create a broad digital catalogue for both scientific and popularization purposes.
First of all, the study of wall paintings based on their 3D-models created possibilities for comparison, relief analysis and understanding of compositional principles. 3D-models allowed the authors to work with all images at once, comparing them to each
other. Usually it is impossible due to the fact that all images are very distant from each other and photos do not provide an overall
view of all characteristics. This enabled to make new conclusions in documenting the images in the Chamber of Sings and the
Chamber of Paintings.
Secondly, this approach has been applied to the «stone blockage» - a new studied object in the Dome Chamber of the cave. It
consists of a large amount of stones of various size, where plaquettes and stones with ocher, concentrations of clay or ocher and
some other archaeological artefacts were found. Some fragments of plaquettes with ocher stains fit each other. 3D scanning
allowed to combine all parts of a slab together and reveal the characteristics of the initial surface and ocher, which was put on it.
Thus, 3D technologies can be applied to all types of practices in caves and be irreplaceable method of office finds study.
