DECONSTRUCTING AN IMPERIAL IDEOLOGY – HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE FASCIST
COLONIZATION OF ISTRIA
Author(s): Lorber, Crtomir (University of Ljubljana)
Presentation Format: Oral
Every culture has a distinctive perception of its social environment. We may see this in very tangible differences between spatial
patterns of different cultures in prehistory, antiquity, medieval age and it can also be observed during the industrial revolution,
when the industrial civilization transformed the landscape and spatial patterns of human behaviour. But even in industrial era
there are differences between different societies. The paper plans to analyse a social environment heavily influenced by ideology – Italian fascist mining colony of Raša in Istria, near Labin coal mines.
This paper considers whether it is possible to analyse a fascist colony in archaeological terms. Since such settlements are an
expression of ideology in material world, it should be, as archaeology primarily studies material culture. Any interpretation should
be built upon a clear theoretical basis – we propose that the work of a French philosopher Henry Lefebvre represents such a
foundation. Lefebvre stated that any independent social order builds a unique social space. This is interpreted through the prism
of sensed-thought-felt matrix of spatial understanding that offers a tool for the interpretation of the material incarnations of
ideological foundations of fascism in material culture.
The paper offers a specific viewpoint when dealing with the question of decolonization and deconstruction of ideological narratives. Fascism has represented itself as a social revolution and its’ conceptualization of space should be unique and different
from other industrial societies. This paper maintains it is not. It shows that fascist colonial practices are similar to other industrial societies; especially since it closest analogies are found in other industrial settlements found near factories and mines. As
such it offers a thesis that any uniqueness of fascist colonies is to be considered as a specific variation of European industrial
colonialism and not as an unique type of Western colonialism.
