EVIDENCE OF PREHISTORIC SETTLEMENT AT CERDANYA VALLEY (EASTERN PYRENEES): FROM
HUNTER-GATHERERS TO AGROPASTORAL SOCIETIES
Author(s): Mangado, Xavier - Oms, Francesc Xavier (SERP. Universitat de Barcelona) - Sánchez de la Torre, Marta (Dpto. Ciencias de la Antigüedad - PPVE. Universidad de Zaragoza; SERP. Universitat de Barcelona) - Aliaga, Sara (Consell Comarcal de
Cerdanya)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Cerdanya valley is the widest southeaster Pyrenean valley. The archaeological record of the area chronologically begins with
a set of three side-scrappers of quartzite recovered from Olopte cave (Isòvol), without stratigraphic context, but typologically
related to the Middle Palaeolithic. The upper Palaeolithic open-air site of Montlleó (Prats i Sansor) at 1.140 m asl, is nowadays
the most ancient example of recurrent hunter-gatherer’s occupation of this valley. The analysis of the stratigraphic sequence
related, on one hand, with several radiocarbon dates ranging between the 23.000 and 18.000 calibrated BP, and on the other
hand, with the techno-typological analysis of the lithic industry, allow us to determine two stratigraphic levels of occupation. The
oldest, corresponding to the end of the LGM is culturally related to the Badegoulian -or the Later Upper Solutrean-; and the more
recent one could be correlated to the lower Magdalenian. The archaeopetrological analyses and the procurement strategies of
hunter- gatherer societies allow us to consider that probably the site was a crossroad for materials and influences during that
period. Unfortunately, there are not evidences of Mesolithic occupation sites at the Valley, only the rock-shelters of la Vall d’Ingla
(Bellver de Cerdanya) have provided a set of many red and brownish abstract pictograms of simple lines and digitations, that have
been attributed to that period.
The occupation of the valley by agro pastoral societies took place in the open air site of Mines de Sanavastre (Das) were many
structures and pottery shreds were recovered corresponding to the Postcardial Neolithic (V millennia cal BC). Our recent works
bring to the light a new site, in this case dating from the middle- final Neolithic, with burial purposes. The Tutes de Menús Cave.
