TRANSFORMATION OF SUBSISTENCE STRATEGIES OF INLAND MESOLITHIC HUNTER-GATHERERFISHER GROUPS IN THE SOUTHWESTERN BALTIC REGION: AN UPDATE FROM FRIESACK, NORTHERN
GERMANY
Author(s): Luebke, Harald - Groß, Daniel (Centre for Baltic and Scandinavian Archaeology; CRC 1266: Scales of Transformation) - Krause-Kyora, Ben (Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel; CRC 1266: Scales of
Transformation) - Meadows, John (Centre for Baltic and Scandinavian Archaeology; Leibniz-Laboratory for Radiometric Dating
and Stable Isotope Research, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel; CRC 1266: Scales of Transformation) - Robson, Harry Kenneth (Centre for Baltic and Scandinavian Archaeology; BioArCh, University of York) - Schmölcke, Ulrich (Centre for Baltic and
Scandinavian Archaeology; CRC 1266: Scales of Transformation) - Gramsch, Bernhard (Retired; Formerly Brandenburg State
Office for Preservation of Monuments and State Archaeological Museum)
Presentation Format: Oral
Recent studies have shown that faunal assemblages from Mesolithic sites in inland Northern Europe contain more fish remains
than previously thought, but the archaeological and archaeozoological record does not reveal the dietary importance of aquatic
species to hunter-gatherer-fishers, even at a societal level. Traditional archaeological methods often provide no direct indication
of variable subsistence practices within a population. For these reasons, palaeodietary studies using stable isotope analyses of
human remains have become routine.
In 2018 we presented radiocarbon (14C) and stable isotope data from nine prehistoric human bones from the Early Mesolithic-Early Neolithic site of Friesack 4, and isotopic data for contemporaneous terrestrial mammals and freshwater fish. The reference data allowed individual palaeodiets to be reconstructed. Further, the application of FRUITS enabled us to estimate the
proportion of aquatic derived protein relative to other resources. Moreover, radiocarbon ages from a number of freshwater fish
enabled us to determine the local dietary reservoir effects. Although the number of individuals was small, it was possible to
infer a decline in the dietary importance of fish from the Preboreal to the Boreal Mesolithic, and an increase in aquatic resource
consumption in the Early Neolithic.
Since then, we have made further investigations on additional human remains from the Neolithic strata of Friesack 4, and others
in the periphery. In addition, recently published data on other Mesolithic remains from northern Germany have become available.
This has provided us with the opportunity to expand our understanding of the changing importance of aquatic and terrestrial
resources, particularly the transformation of subsistence strategies in the Mesolithic and across the Neolithic transition in the
southwestern Baltic area.
