HOW THE CYCLADIC ISLANDERS FOUND THEIR MARBLES: MATERIAL, SKILL AND SOCIAL COGNITION
IN THE ANCIENT AEGEAN
Author(s): Aston, Alexander (University of Oxford)
Presentation Format: Oral
Cycladic sculpture is perhaps the best known and most esteemed category of prehistoric figurines. Yet, this esteem has deeply
restricted understanding of these artefacts due to looting and the illicit trade in antiquities and the emphasis on the figurines
as works of art. Roughly thirty percent of known Cycladic figurines come from secure contexts. This lack of evidence has led to
rampant speculation on the symbolic meanings of the figurines (e.g. the mother goddess) as well as overstating design similarities as evidence of crafting by specific individuals. These often unfounded and exaggerated claims stem from an assumption
that our contemporary typologies are valid and form conceptual blind spots regarding the relationship between mind, matter,
and environment. This presentation argues that through a multiscalar and interdisciplinary approach, one can reconceptualise
the design and function of Cycladic figurines as a process of cognitive-developmental niche construction that reshaped the
boundaries of social cognition in the EBA. Utilising Material Engagement Theory, this paper explores the relationship between
the properties of marble, the development of skill, and the broad ecological and settlement patterns in which Cycladic styles
emerged. By applying the evidence from neuroscience and cognitive science on body and face perception, the presentation
demonstrates how Cycladic figurines were an effective technology for capturing joint and collective attention. It then explores
the non-representational semiotics that are manifested by Cycladic figurines and their contexts in order to show how the figurines supported shared understanding and activity. By applying this evidence to the long-term transformations in Cycladic marble sculpting from the Neolithic to the EBII sanctuary on the island of Keros, it illuminates the design and use of the figurines as a
kinshipping technology. In other words, shaping and circulating marble provided an embodied, enactive and distributed semiotic
ecology through which social cognition self-organised at emergent scales.
