THE HEAVEN’S CUCKOO: INTERPRETING A EUROPEAN ARCHAIC ASTRONOMICAL MYTH PRESERVED IN
THE ROMANIAN TRADITIONS, AND ITS ICONOGRAPHY ON COUNTRY ARTEFACTS
Author(s): Negru, Cristina (Independent researcher, University of Bucharest)
Presentation Format: Oral
The zoomorphic metaphor is a common thing in denominating asterisms throughout history. Choosing icons of either real life
or of composite animals (chimera) to represent asterisms is based on different characteristics of such animals and the most
important of them seems to be the superposition between their biological rhythm (reproduction season, hibernation, migration
etc.) and the moment when the asterism is visible on the sky in different aspects (heliacal rising, culmination etc.).
One of those time-markers animals is the cuckoo. Its characteristics and behavior produced a protean myth with remanences in
language, beliefs, artefacts from different cultural areas, from Western Europe to India.
In the Romanian traditional culture, an oral and very conservative culture till very recent times, with a vast patrimony of ritual and
ceremonial texts, very well documented by generations of ethnographers, the cuckoo image survived in a complex myth which
irrigate a large number of fields : the old pre-Christianism calendar (with two Day of the Cuckoo, marking the period when its song
is audible), funeral songs, tales, beliefs, customs, ethnobotanics, artefacts (pottery, Easter eggs, carpets, shirts).
Interpreting this material from a transdisciplinary perspective, one can notice several isotopisms and narrative structures that
lead us to identify the heaven’s cuckoo (one of its traditional names) as a representation of an asterism, present on the spring
sky, between the spring equinox and the summer solstice. Moreover, the myth produced archetypal icons with specific elements
of visual language, still used as traditional patterns on country artefacts from different cultures and times.
The paper presents how the various correlations of the myth with the sky and in particular with the Pleiades, conduct to the
identification of a forgotten asterism of the old European sky. Finally, it could be relevant for its methodology in a comparative
research context.
