THE BRONZE AGE OF SOUTHWESTERN IBERIAN PENINSULA - ENDOGENOUS EVOLUTION VERSUS
MIGRATION STIMULI
Author(s): Melo, Linda (Laboratório de Pré-história, CIAS, Departamento Ciências da Vida, Universidade de Coimbra) - Baptista, Lídia (Centro de estudos de Arqueologia, Artes e Ciências do Património; Arqueologia e Património, Lda) - Mataloto, Rui
(UNIARQ; Câmara Municipal do Redondo) - Valério, Pedro (Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa) - Silva, Ana Maria
(Laboratório de Prehistória, CIAS, Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Universidade de Coimbra) - Soares, António Manuel (Universidade de Lisboa)
Presentation Format: Oral
Geographically, the Bronze Age of Southwestern Iberian Peninsula encompasses the Portuguese South, the province of Huelva
and part of that of Badajoz. In recent years, our knowledge about the pre and protohistoric archaeology of the Southwest, complemented by archaeometric research of various types, has undergone an enormous increase. This research has been showing
that, during the Bronze Age, a dispersed settlement is a recurrent trace. Only by the end of the 2nd millennium BC, during the Late
Bronze Age, fortified settlements appear. Moreover, Bronze Age burials occur in a wide variety of structures, namely in stone
cists (isolated or forming part of a necropolis), pits, hypogea, and also in reuses of collective funerary monuments of Neolithic or
Chalcolithic chronology. Pottery shapes, where carinated vessels and burnished surfaces are usual, appear to undergo a weak
evolution over Bronze Age times. The copper based metallurgy, characterized by arsenical coppers, also does not show a great
evolution, as bronze only become common during the Late Bronze Age, despite the existence of some earlier evidence of its
production and use. Similar situation occurs with noble metals (gold and silver) - native sources are commonly used and only
by the end of the period artificial alloys are manufactured. Nevertheless, some contacts or some trade (exotic materials) with
other peninsular regions or even with the Mediterranean area are visible in the archaeological record, mainly at the beginning and
at the end of this whole cultural period. Although DNA studies are only beginning for the Southwestern Bronze Age, the current
archaeological evidence does not seem to indicate the existence of relevant migrations, but rather an endogenous evolution of
the communities that inhabited this region of the Iberian Peninsula, despite the rupture with the Neolithic settlement pattern
detected at the beginning of the 2nd millennium.
