SOLSTICE ALIGNMENTS AT ANGKOR WAT AND NEARBY TEMPLES: CONNECTING TO THE CYCLES OF
TIME
Author(s): Romain, William (Independent reseacher)
Presentation Format: Oral
Built in the early twelfth century, Angkor Wat is one of the world’s largest ancient religious structures. Each year thousands of
people visit Angkor Wat to view the equinox sunrise over the center lotus-shaped tower. There are, however, additional celestial
alignments that were also of likely importance. In this presentation solstice alignments are identified for Angkor Wat, Bakong,
Phnom Bakheng, Phnom Bok, Phnom Krom, East Mebon, Pre Rup, Banteay Srei, Ta Keo, Baphuon, Preah Khan, and Bayon.
Subsequent to ground and aerial reconnaissance, archaeoastronomic assessments were made of Angkor Wat and nearby temples using Google Earth satellite imagery. More than 70 solstice alignments were identified including 21 solstice alignments at
Angkor Wat, alone.
Among the lines of evidence suggesting that these alignments were intentional are their continued incorporation into temple designs even as architectural styles changed over the centuries, as well as iconographic details found in bas reliefs at Angkor Wat.
Together, these and other lines of evidence suggest that it was important for Angkor temples to be connected to the sun. As
I will demonstrate, solstice alignments defined the physical parameters of the Angkor cosmos. Moreover, if, as endorsed here,
Angkor temples were microcosmic models of the cosmos, then arguably, solstice alignments connected the temples to the
cyclic movement of the cosmos.
The findings reported here contribute to our understanding Angkor Wat. In this, we are reminded that when assessing ancient
sites, we need to consider relationships to earth, water, and sky. In particular, archaeoastronomic assessments help us understand how people relate to the cosmos through their built structures. Anything less and we risk presenting a skewed picture of
the sites we study and the people who once lived there.
