IRON AND SALT – THE ROLE OF BURGSTALLKOGEL NEAR GROSSKLEIN IN THE DISTRIBUTION AND
COMMUNICATION NETWORKS OF THE SOUTH-EASTERN ALPS
Author(s): Mele, Marko - Hellmuth Kramberger, Anja - Modl, Daniel (Universalmuseum Joanneum)
Presentation Format: Oral
With the emerging Iron Age the relatively small flat peak called Burgstallkogel in the hinterland of the Mura river valley has risen
to one of the most prominent Hallstatt period sites of the south-eastern Alps. The dominating position over the Sulm and Saggau
valleys within a closed micro-region with easy controllable accesses seems to be one of the crucial factors for the development
of the settlement and the vast tumulus cemeteries known today as the Sulm-valley cultural group.
In the year 2017 the Universalmuseum Joanneum started the EU-project Iron-Age-Danube, which is financed by the Interreg
Danube Transnational Programme. The project enabled us to look beyond the site of Burgstallkogel and its tumulus cemeteries at
the micro-region of Sulm and Saggau valleys and try to understand the landscape dynamics in the Early Iron Age. One of the major
questions of the research was, how did the inhabitants of the settlement on the Burgstallkogel understood, used and controlled
the space and the resources.
Many of the processes observed on micro-level give interesting hints on how the Hallstatt period networks functioned in the
south-eastern Alps. Styria lies on the major route from the salt mines of Hallstatt to the Pannonian plain and was additionally
rich with iron. Perfect circumstances for the creation of networks, which created high value for its owners. The first look on the
region shows, that we have to think about major centres, like Burgstallkogel near Großklein and Falkenberg above Strettweg, and
a whole series of smaller settlements with different roles, as e.g. for up-keeping the distribution network. The questions, which
we would like to address in our paper are, how did this network function, how far did the influence area of major centres in the
south-eastern Alps reach and how can this be observed in the archaeological record.
