CULTURAL HYBRIDITY IN GROBINA ARCHAEOLOGICAL COMPLEX IN THE PRE-VIKING AGE: AN EXAMPLE OF EARLY SCANDINAVIAN DIASPORA IN THE EASTERN BALTIC
Author(s): Sne, Andris (University of Latvia)
Presentation Format: Oral
The coastal areas of the Baltic Sea in the territory of present-day Latvia were sparsely inhabited by the local communities of the
Couronians in the middle of the first millennium AD. The local settlement in Grobiņa (present-day urban area) probably consisted
of less than 100 individuals before 650 AD, although region was rich in arable lands and had good geographical location close
to coast and riverways. It was there where around 650-700 AD the earliest Scandinavian overseas settlement activities took
place. Such early chronology is supported by both grave goods analysis and radiocarbon dating. The Scandinavian presence
here increased until mid-9th century as evidenced by at least three large cemeteries with around 3000 burials (including both
female and male graves). Alongside two Scandinavian communities (coming from Gotland and central Sweden) there existed
also local Couronian group, thus presumably these different groups co-existed and perhaps even cooperated in some military or
economy activities for two centuries. The later burials of the Scandinavians show clear influence of the local cultural traditions,
and gradually the Scandinavian character of Grobiņa is vanished. In these centuries, Grobina was not involved in long-distance
exchange networks and rather it was large and rich agricultural community, although regular contacts over the Baltic Sea might
be supposed. Several Scandinavian cemeteries and stray finds in the surrounding area and neighbouring regions (near the Venta
River and Daugava River) suggest also attempts of inland colonisation and search for new trading ways eastwards. It is still
unclear how large was Scandinavian settlement (cultural layer in Grobina covers about 20 hectares but it may largely relate to
inhabitation of Middle and Modern ages) and how did it cease to exist, while traditionally it is attributed to the military raid by the
Swedes in 854 described later by Rimbert in his Vita Anskarii.
