DETERMINATION OF LITHIC RAW MATERIALS AND SUPPLY STRATEGIES IN THE SELLA VALLEY: TITO
BUSTILLO (RIBADESELLA, ASTURIAS, SPAIN)
Author(s): Martín Jarque, Sergio (Universidad de Salamanca) - Tarriño, Antonio (Centro Nacional de Investigación sobre la
Evolución Humana) - Bécares, Julián - Álvarez-Fernández, Esteban (Universidad de Salamanca)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Tito Bustillo Cave (Ribadesella, Asturias) is located at the mouth of the Sella River. It was discovered in 1968, the year in
which paintings and engravings from the Paleolithic era were found. In 1970 M. A. García Guinea carried out the first excavations
in the so-called Conjunto XI, close to what at that time was considered the old entrance of the cave, today blocked by a detachment. This area, now known as Área de Estancia, was excavated by J. A. Moure between 1972 and 1986. The results of the
investigations brought to light one of the most important Magdalenian sites in the Cantabrian Spain, which documented abundant faunal remains, lithic and bone industry, portable art, etc. This paper presents the first results of the analysis of lithic raw
materials in general and flint in particular of layer 1c2, assigned to the Lower Magdalenian (ca. 18,000 cal BP). The classification
of the lithic pieces has been based on their external textural characters, for which we have used a reference collection. For the
determination of flint, a comprehensive petrographic analysis of the lithological group was carried out through a binocular loupe
and the selection of samples for its study by means of thin films and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The objective is to know what geological formations could have been supplied by the hunter-gatherer groups that inhabited Tito Bustillo, reconstruct their spatial
mobility and determine the patterns of transformation and use of flint during the Magdalenian. The first results indicate that, in
addition to the presence of autochthonous lithologies of the Sella Valley such as quartzite, radiolarite or so-called black chert,
in layer 1c2 predominate different types of flint, both from the western and central Cantabrian (Piloña, Monte Picota) as coming
from the Spanish and French eastern Cantabrian (Flysch, Chalosse).
