THE INTRODUCTION OF MONUMENTAL LANDSCAPES IN SOUTHERN SCANDINAVIA IN THE 4TH
MILLENNIUM – A NEW WORLD OF STRATIFIED POLITIES
Author(s): Artursson, Magnus (Swedish National Historical Museum)
Presentation Format: Oral
Excavations of the last two decades in southern Scandinavia have started to reveal the complexity of monumental landscapes
in the 4th millennium BC. Monuments placed in small groups as well as large sites of many monuments were part of the landscape
indicating a stratified society. It is important to recognize that these sites have been formed over time, thus undergoing change
in social importance over generations. A stability as for location is seen at several sites, although this does not necessarily mean
inheritance within the same families or clan over several generations. Altering older monuments may also have been a way of
taking over a hierarchical position. Thus, it is the social and political positions that are manifested at these sites, not necessarily
tied to the same families or clans over time.
Mobilization of labor and surplus of staples was necessary to maintain regular feasting events at the monuments and at the
central gathering sites. Historical and anthropological research shows that a leadership structure characterized as big-man societies or simple chiefdoms must have been necessary to mobilize and manage the economic surplus. Construction of monuments and organization of feasting organized by a big-man or chief probably represented the social and political position, which
determined ownership of associated ceremonies and rituals, e.g. the social capital. The regular feasting events accompanied
ritual activities preoccupied with ancestral cult and fertility.
Consequently, the Neolithic monuments in Southern Scandinavia can be seen as the physical manifestations of social capital
and labor used by local and regional leaders to establish selected places with ritual and emotive significance. Early forms of property rights instituted new sociopolitical institutions with rights to monopolize and utilize surplus for local and regional leaders.
Supra-regional contacts provided the upper strata of society with high status objects to manifest their social position.
