MINOR SITES AND EXPERIENCE: THE NEW FRONTIER OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL TOURISM
Author(s): Megale, Carolina (Past in Progress)
Presentation Format: Oral
Alleviating the pressure on the major tourist hotspots of a city or a region is one of the major challenges of cultural tourism
today. In meeting this challenge at a global level, archaeology plays a key role. Like other humanistic professions, archaeology
supports an appreciation of both immaterial and material forms of cultural heritage. It plays a vital part in the cycle of production
that, originating with archaeological field practice, leads to finished cultural products. The archaeologist is thus a sort of artisan,
dedicated to the production of a good that with a defined use-value and a social purpose. The cycle of archaeological production
of cultural goods, in which the archaeologist is the craftsperson, involves several important phases: research, documentation,
interpretation, and conservation. Each of these steps seeks to direct the benefit of archaeological “products” toward the public
through the provision of services that make a positive contribution to societies and individuals
The role of the archaeologist, faber of these cultural goods and products, is thus completely oriented toward the public and the
community of citizens that will benefit from cultural heritage resources. In the modern context, in which tourists are “temporary
citizens,” the creation of spaces for experiential tourism is the new frontier. Such public spaces would be
strongly anchored in the identity and story of places, offering enlightened, concrete alternatives to mass cultural tourism.
In this vein, a pilot experience has been initiated in the region of Populonia, in the Val di Cornia. Here, an important project of recovery of “minor sites” emphasizes an agenda of education and outreach through the creation of opportunities for experiential
tourism. This project orchestrates authentic and unique experiences that both fulfill the desires of tourists, volunteers, and
visitors from abroad, and also support a public which is educated, oriented, and aware.
