CONSERVATION STRATEGIES FOR ARCHAEOLOGICALLY EXCAVATED STRUCTURES IN A CLIMATE
CHANGE FUTURE
Author(s): Douglas, Gavin (HES Historic Environment Scotland)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeology and specifically archaeological structures are generally accepted to be non-renewable resources. The ability to
conserve and manage these national assets with consideration to the predicted weather events of the 21st century is being
brought further into focus. There are numerous conservation charters and guidance both nationally and internationally that have
been adopted in the conservation of built structures, the conservation of archaeological finds and the process of archaeology
itself. What is missing is guidance on how to conserve archaeologically excavated structures and sites during excavation and any
resultant public presentation post excavation. This research aims to create a strategy on how to approach projects and guidance
as to how this can be applied.
Experimental works and data collection will include the review of relevant excavation plans, focussing primarily on the primary region of the North of Scotland and will study any conservation plans and survey sites for evidence of application and its effectiveness. The views of archaeologist who have managed similar projects will be sought to canvas opinion on the current procedures
as well as methods theoretically or practically applied which may impact on conservation. New options for materials, methods
and technology available especially for conservation and reinterpretation of sites including visual remodelling and remote access. archaeological structures in the specifically chosen sites and assess their condition. Experimental structures simulating
conservation treatments have been constructed and their deterioration and movement is being monitored to give results which
will show which is and which is not suitable to promote longevity of presentation.
From the data collected should be both quantitative and qualitative in nature and be thorough study of archaeological record
which will in turn create an effective tools for future practitioners promoting, preservation, presentation whilst still allowing
manageable visitor access.
