SHOED OR NOT: EXPERIMENTS TO DETECT GARMENTS WORN BY THE DECEASED. CONTRIBUTION OF
BIOCHEMICAL ANALYSES ON CREMATED BONES
Author(s): Salesse, Kevin (Research Unit: Anthropology and Human Genetics, Department of Biology of Organisms and Ecology, Université Libre de Bruxelles; UMR 5199: “PACEA - De la Préhistoire à l’Actuel: Culture, Environnement et Anthropologie”, University of Bordeaux) - Snoeck, Christophe (Research Unit: Analytical, Environmental & Geo-Chemistry, Department
of Chemistry, Vrije Universiteit Brussel; G-Time Laboratory, Université Libre de Bruxelles) - Capuzzo, Giacomo (Research Unit:
Anthropology and Human Genetics, Department of Biology of Organisms and Ecology, Université Libre de Bruxelles) - Sabaux,
Charlotte (Department of Archaeology, Ghent University) - Sengeløv, Amanda (Research Unit: Anthropology and Human Genetics, Department of Biology of Organisms and Ecology, Université Libre de Bruxelles) - Stamataki, Elisavet (Maritime Cultures Research Institute, Department of Art Sciences & Archaeology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel) - Dalle, Sarah (Department
of Archaeology, Ghent University) - Hlad, Marta - Annaert, Rica (Maritime Cultures Research Institute, Department of Art
Sciences & Archaeology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel) - Vercauteren, Martine (Research Unit: Anthropology and Human Genetics,
Department of Biology of Organisms and Ecology, Université Libre de Bruxelles)
Presentation Format: Oral
If post-cremation life histories of cremated bones and cremation-related deposits can be readily investigated as they refer to
the last handling of the deceased, the treatment of the corpse during the burning act itself is little addressed by textual sources
or debated in anthropological studies. Among the topics discussed are questions whether the individuals were buried clothed
or not and criteria for evaluating indirectly the wealth of deceased or their social status in the past. This study aims to identify
– through stable isotope evidences (δ13C, δ18O), infrared indices (IRSF, CN:P, etc.), and elemental concentrations on calcined
bones – if the deceased was shoed or not, and whether the burned elements of garments were worn by the dead or simply placed
on the pyre. As the shoes are likely one of the most resistant clothing items to fire and might represent a proxy to discuss the
presence of any garments items inside the burial. It is hypothesized that foot bones encased in shoes might experience heating conditions characteristic to confined-space cremation (low oxygen availability, poorly ventilated). These heating conditions
could be related to the fact of presence or absence of shoes. For this, we carried out a series of outdoor burnings and laboratory
heating experiments. Ventilated and unventilated shoes have been made using vegetable tanned leather (cow and goat). Animal
feet (i.e. pig), used as proxies for humans, have been burned according different heating conditions. Results from these experiments will be presented. Recent advances in biogeochemical techniques present a unique opportunity to be able to characterize
the cremation and bring a new breakthrough in our current archaeo-anthropological knowledge of the burning act itself through
time.
