CHANGING THE MEANING. THE STUDY OF A WALLED STRUCTURE IN THE ANDES
Author(s): Balbi, Jose (Colchester Archaeological Group; Ministerio de Cultura y Educación, Buenos Aires) - Buffalino, Eduardo
(ISFD - Instituto Superior de Formacion Docente) - Cristofaro, Ilaria (University of Wales Trinity Saint David; Osservatorio Astronomico Sirio, Castellana Grotte)
Presentation Format: Oral
Our work presents the an Inka temple located in the most important city south of the capital of the Empire, Cuzco. However, the
structure has been known for several years and it is part of an archaeological park visited touristically.
The archaeologycal work led to understand the change of function that corresponds to this structure, which was always considered a military fortress and that even in the official story is called El Atalaya (The Watchtower), a designation that goes together
with a series of stories that describe Inka soldiers guarding a road or access to the sacred city that is located near the structure.
”The Watchtower” is a structure built on a hill with the visible remains of a double wall, had supposed the existence of some kind
of fortress, without mention that the Inkas, to indicate a sacred place, built structures of stone around them and that these walls
did not have defensive functions.
The excavation of the ”Atalaya”, carried out between 2015 and 2018, ended by indicating the existence of a ceremonial furnace,
dumps, and other sacred elements that confirm that the structure was a temple. Even the falling stones of the surrounding wall
were calculated, determining that its height did not make sense as a defensive structure. Our archaeological research determined that the structure is a Temple.
”El Shincal de Quimivil”, located in Argentina, was an important Inka administrative and religious center, it was excavated and
studied from the 60’s to the present day.
The popular idea remains and because of its appearance, elevated and with its stone wall, even today the guides and the visitors
of the archaeological site agree to imagine soldiers stationed behind the walls waiting for an attack that could never have happened. Today we can scientifically explain the truth.
