REFOCUSING WITH AN INDIGENOUS LENS: THE ALTEPETL IN SIXTEENTH-CENTURY MEXICO
Author(s): Bellamy, Katherine (Digital Humanities Hub - History Department, Lancaster University)
Presentation Format: Oral
The dominance of Western European discourse is not a new phenomenon. Rather, this is a tradition which extends back centuries
and has, as a result, often altered and obscured our understandings of history. This paper will focus on a socio-political entity
which was prevalent in the area we now know as Mexico, which has been variously misinterpreted and misrepresented since the
arrival of the Spanish in the 16th century, namely, the altepetl.
Derived from the Nahuatl yn atl, yn tepetl (“water, mountain”), the two elements deemed essential to any Mesoamerican political
entity, the altepetl was of both philosophical and physical significance in Nahua society. During the early 16th century, the translation of altepetl into Castilian redefined its concept. Altepetl was defined by the Spanish as ‘pueblo’ (town), and huey-altepetl
(great altepetl) as ‘ciudad’ (city). While the Spanish primarily understood ‘altepetl’ as an urban or political concept, it is now known
that Nahua definitions extended to symbolic, aesthetic, ecological and geographical connotations. In the last 20 years, a great
deal of research has been conducted aiming to clarify the concept, but also its original manifestation in the historical and archaeological record. Despite this, the altepetl’s complex nature and intricate transformations has meant that its true conformation
remains ambiguous, with considerable scope for further research.
In this paper, I will explore the different understandings of the altepetl, and how these understandings have often been obscured
by a distinctly Western lens rather than focusing on indigenous knowledge of these entities which were so essential to the functioning of Nahua society. In doing so, I aim to examine the issues associated with employing a strictly Western approach, and,
most importantly, both the necessity and value of centring indigenous knowledge, particularly when investigating indigenous
concepts.
