LIVING (WORLD) HERITAGE CITIES. INSIGHTS FROM ARCHAEOLOGY AND HISTORY, GEOGRAPHY
AND SOCIAL SCIENCES, AND PLANNING AND DESIGN
Theme: Archaeological heritage and museum management: future chances, future risks
Organisers: de Waal, Maaike (Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University; ARGEOgraph) - de Groot, Mara (Centre for Global Heritage and Development) - Rosetti, Ilaria (Department of Heritage, University of Antwerp) - Jinadasa, Uditha (Department of
Archaeology, Ministry of Higher Education and Cultural Affrairs, Sri Lanka)
Format: Regular session
With the majority of people living in cities and numbers of urban dwellers increasing daily, national and international policies are
being directed towards stimulating livable and sustainable futures for cities. Many metropolises have a historic origin and developments through time have influenced development of the cities. Inner cities follow ancient waterways and roads; buildings and
other structures may be (partially) historic. Modern city dwellers live in an environment that largely depends on decisions made
by previous generations. Modern city life, however, constantly asks for adaptations and internal dynamics change city appearances and functions. Especially in the case of World Heritage cities adaptations are significant. Tourists, eager to experience the
‘Outstanding Universal Value’ of a place, require accommodation, food, entertainment and souvenirs. Developers convert historical buildings into hotels and tourist shops. Traffic constantly pressurizes old, narrow streets. Inhabitants increasingly move to
less gentrified outer zones. Slowly, city characters change. While cores and buffer zones were once enlisted as World Heritage
because of both the authenticity and integrity of a cities’ parts, now these are exactly the elements that are under threat (with
the ultimate risk of ‘delisting’). The desire to assign a World Heritage status to living cities may overshadow the awareness of
possible implications for the city and its inhabitants. It also raises questions whether studying the diversity of long-term urban
traditions effectively inform design for sustainable urban futures, whether it is possible to find a balance between an authentic
and a dynamic city life and who the stakeholders are and how are they involved in new developments.
This session crosses disciplinary and geographical boundaries in order to generate synergizing discussions on meaning and
implications of ‘World Heritage Listing’, ‘Living Heritage’, ‘Outstanding Universal Values’, ‘Integrity’, ‘Place Making’, ‘Sustainable
Planning’ and ‘Authenticity’.
