A SWEET ISLAND: SUGAR PRODUCTION AND CERAMIC MANUFACTURE IN 11TH-16TH CENTURIES AD
IN SICILY
Author(s): Mentesana, Roberta - Buxeda i Garrigós, Jaume (Dept. d’Història i Arqueologia, Universitat de Barcelona) - Kilikoglou,
Vassilis (Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, N.C.S.R. Demokritos) - Madrid i Fernández, Marisol (Dept. d’Història
i Arqueologia, Universitat de Barcelona) - Hein, Anno (Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, N.C.S.R. Demokritos) Montana, Giuseppe (DiSTeM, Universitá di Palermo)
Presentation Format: Oral
Sugar production and consumption followed the Islamic expansion in the western Mediterranean and had a huge impact on European social, cultural and economic development since medieval times. The introduction of sugar cultivation entailed knowledge
transfer and new technological requirements, such as the manufacture of sugar pots, used for the crystallization of the sugar,
which require specific design, thermal and mechanical properties.
The SpotEu project, funded under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie actions, explores the development and impact of sugar production in western Europe through the study of sugar pot manufacture from an interdisciplinary perspective, integrating archaeological and historical research with material science and material culture approaches in an innovative way. Sugar pots are assessed
on a morphological, technological and performance point of view aided by instrumental analysis and software modelling. The
comparison with reference ceramic materials and written records allows the investigation of the scale of ceramic production and
exchange networks, as well as potters’ technological choices in the construction of these on-purpose vessels.
This paper focuses on sugar pots from Sicily, one of the main regions for sugar production in western Europe in the 11th-16th
centuries AD. First archaeological and analytical results are presented, revealing different centres of sugar pots production on
the island as well as specific choices in the design of the vessels and its properties. This will offer the opportunity to shed light
on how craftspeople adapt or transformed their ceramic making traditions in order to face the new product demands from the
sugar production industry.
