THE GREEK COLONIAL EXPANSION (8TH-4TH C. BC) THROUGH PALAEODEMOGRAPHIC PROJECTIONS
AND THE ROLE OF MOTHERS IN POPULATION GROWTH
Author(s): Zisis, Anastasios - Zafeiris, Konstantinos - Koukli, Marianna - Xanthopoulou, Panagiota - Georgiadou, Angelina - Papageorgopoulou, Christina (Laboratory of Physical Anthropology, Democritus University of Thrace)
Presentation Format: Oral
The scope of this presentation is twofold: on the one hand we bring forward a palaeodemographic approach of the phenomenon
of Greek colonization (8th-4th centuries BC) based on computer simulation models. We model the mode and tempo of colonial
movements and the evolution of colonial settings through a population structure and population growth aspect. On the other
hand, we perform an anthropological and archaeometric case study on selected female individuals on a reproductive age from
the necropolis of Abdera, a Greek colony located in North Aegean (Archaic & Classical periods).
Regarding the palaeodemographic part, we recreate the interactions between Greeks and locals on a ‘global’ Mediterranean
level. Furthermore, we test the hypothesis of an overall population growth, which is considered reaching its peak in the fourth
century BC. We use anthropological and archaeological data from Greek colonial sites (cities and necropoleis) for creating computer-based simulation models that could demographically fit the initial expeditions of the first settlers and the subsequent
developments in population size and structure. For the anthropological and archaeometric part, we analyze the diet and nutrition
of 50 female individuals from Abdera through their isotopic signatures of carbon, nitrogen and sulphur, and correlate them with
estimations of their stature and BMI. Characteristics and variations in body height and body mass of females are integrated in
the study as proxies for palaeodemographic modelling in order to assess diet in relation to growth and development. Demographic indices, such as the fertility rate of a population, are crucial parameters of well-being and potential population growth, as they
are strongly connected with female health and nutrition. The auxological perspective in the study of Abdera explores the living
standards of females coupled with demographic indexes, while focusing on mothers and motherhood.
