THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WATERSCAPES AND NURAGIC COMMUNITIES IN PROTOHISTORIC
SARDINIA
Author(s): Pisanu, Laura (University of Cagliari) - Hitchcock, Louise (University of Melbourne) - Cicilloni, Riccardo (University
of Cagliari)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper investigates the role of waterscapes as unifying elements in the cultural and economic relationships between the
sites of Sinis and Montiferru in Western Sardinia. The Banatou site, whose oldest habitation dates to the Late Bronze age (X-IX
B. C.), is near the stream of Riu Maistu Impera which rises in Montiferru and flows into the Cabras lagoon. Sinis’ wetlands formation and maintenance depends in part on Montiferru’s watershed. We suggest that the Rio Maistu Impera could be the link to
understanding the purpose of the Nuragic cultures around the Late Bronze Age village and funerary areas at Banatou and the
famous funerary site at Monte Prama characterized by Nuragic statues. This paper will seek to better clarify the nature of the link
between these sites through an analysis of the waterscapes and architectural evidence that connect them.
Known for the unique similarity to Monte Prama’s statuary, Banatou may have been the site of burials of these heroic figures of
the Early Iron Age, based on the coexistence of a sculpted element in the form of a limestone human head found along with a large
number of limestone and sandstone slabs. The monumentalization of the funerary space wasn’t new for the Montiferru Nuragic
communities as seen to the north of Banatou, in the localities of Procus, Funtana Pira and Caratzu. There were discovered Neolithic rock carved tombs, dolmen, allées couvertes and seven giants’ tombs built at distances between 100 and 200 metres
apart. It will be argued that the proximity and waterscape connectivity of these built features created a monumental funerary
landscape, without comparison in the Nuragic period (XVII-XII B. C.). After the Late Bronze Age this funerary area was no longer
used and we suggest that its role might have been continued by the site at Banatou.
