THE TENDENCIES OF ROMAN ARCHAEOLOGY IN EUROPE: THEORETICAL VS. TECHNICAL APPROACHES
Author(s): Lopez Garcia, Antonio (University of Helsinki)
Presentation Format: Oral
In recent decades, the archaeological discourse applied to Roman studies has suffered an unequal evolution among European
countries. While in Southern Europe, the studies have been focused more intensely on technical aspects, in the countries belonging to Central and Northern Europe the approach followed is merely theoretical.
Nowadays, it is quite common to find collaborations among research teams from different parts of Europe. This trend has allowed to establish a compromise between technical studies, such as urbanism, epigraphy, architecture or material culture, and
theoretical studies focusing towards an in-depth study of conceptual, ethical, social and political issues such as Romanization,
republicanism, or gender studies.
These international collaborations have devoted their efforts to study all the possible technical and theoretical aspects related
to the issues analyzed. However, there are serious problems concerning both archaeological trends. It is not uncommon that language differences lead us to ignore or neglect these technical or theoretical studies focused on concrete issues. For example,
it is sometimes quite difficult to find mentions of works written in Romance languages on British, German or Nordic publications.
However, for what concerns the Italian, Spanish or French publications, it is usual to find on them mentions to books written in
English and German, but these tend to be studied regarding their technical aspects.
The goal of Roman archaeology in the 21st century must be to integrate both tendencies into one. Perhaps, the SpaceLaw project funded by the ERC in Helsinki could be an example that sets the path for a new approach to deal with the issues related to
the politics of the Roman past considering both points of view: Technical and Theoretical. The main aim of this paper is to discuss
the reasons underlying the different criteria and themes undertaken by researchers from Europe when studying the Roman past.
