SIZE MATTERS! - METRIC AND MORPHOLOGICAL SEX MARKERS AND THEIR VALUE IN
ARCHAEOANTHROPOLOGICAL ANALYSES OF HUMAN SKELETAL REMAINS
Author(s): Navitainuck, Denise - Vach, Werner (University Hospital Basel) - Alt, Kurt (University of Basel; Danube Private University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Biological sex, alongside age at death, is among the most essential information about an individual from an archaeological context, and a key building block for population studies. An accurate assessment of these parameters is highly dependent on the
preservation and integrity of human remains.
This study analyses different metric and morphological traits previously utilised for sex determination of human skeletons.
Based on an early medieval skeletal series (Mannheim-Bösfeld, Germany), the authors’ aim is to develop a recommendation for
a minimal set of traits which allows sufficiently accurate sex determination for a maximum of individuals. In this session, study
design will be presented.
First, the sex-specific population means and standard deviations have been compared with those from the original publications
in order to evaluate the likelihood that standards developed based on other populations are transferable to the population of
the Bösfeld site. An additional, indirect approach is also applied: a test’s accuracy is compared with measured accuracy when
a new test is constructed on the basis of the trait (or score) in the Bösfeld data, and the proportion of the population for whom
determined sex changes is calculated.
Secondarily, test accuracy is gauged on the basis of determined sex. Sex determination is based on three independent reference
standards: Diagnose Sexuelle Probabiliste (DSP; Murail et al. 2005), using the subjects with a posterior probability for male or
female above 0.95 based on metric pelvis traits; latent class analysis (LCA) of all traits to obtain a posterior probability for each
individual; and an archaeological assessment based on gender-specific grave goods.
Finally, the utility of traits and trait groups, defined as the probability of obtaining a posterior probability above 0.95 for a randomly selected individual, is evaluated.
