ARCHAEOLOGY STINKS! FINDING SMELL IN ARCHAEOLOGY
Author(s): Malik, Rose (Field Archaeology, University of York)
Presentation Format: Oral
Smell is a language, communicative and interpretive. It connects the physical, social, emotional and semantic, informing meaning
and understanding. How can we engage with the intangible, invisible and incorporeal sense of smell? Is it possible to find smell
in the past?
Historically, olfaction has often been considered a secondary sense player, only enhancing the more obvious senses of taste;
not regarded as important as touch, sound or vision. Therefore, olfactory archaeology has primarily relied upon conceptual approaches.
Since 2000, empirical analysis into odorous biomolecules in ancient preservation has been building momentum. Even so there
has been no consolidation of method, practice and interpretation put forward in archaeology.
Headspace sampling is a ground-breaking technique in archaeology which allows direct access to ancient odour molecules, for
analysis and interpretation. By focusing on a critically aware methodology of excavation and analysis, resulting in demonstrable
empirical information, this innovative technique allows us to explore inroads into sensorially-based socio-cultural narratives.
With a multi-disciplinary focus, the combination of empirical data and archaeological theory paves the way for presenting another dimension to archaeological investigations using odour molecules as primary source evidence.
Thus, whereas analysis of datasets may reveal the application of particular aromatic agents as part of anthropogenic preservation processes, the broader narrative around the ‘essential’ ritualised mortuary practice can be explored to provide an understanding of ancient ‘existential’ cognitive processes that express ontological significance within wider socio-cultural contexts.
Effectively, headspace sampling technique and methodology enables multi-faceted engagement which allows us to bridge the
gap between disciplines and present strong evidence-based narratives and interpretations of past cultures.
This talk will illustrate how we can bring both science and theory to build a metanarrative around the treatment of the body and
understand mortuary practices and go on to discuss what other types of preservation which could be explored.
