DECONSTRUCTION OF PREHISTORIC ECONOMY: VALUE, BARTER AND INTERPRETATION OF
NON-MONETARY FINDS IN ARCHAEOLOGY
Theme: Interpreting the archaeological record: artefacts, humans and landscapes
Organisers: Tóth, Peter (Department of Archaeology, Masaryk University) - Pokutta, Dalia (Department of Archaeology, Archaeological Research Laboratory, Stockholm University) - Gralak, Tomasz (Institute of Archaeology, University of Wroclaw)
- Kuleshov, Viacheslav (Department of Archaeology, Stockholm Numismatic Institute, Stockholm University)
Format: Regular session
Archaic non-monetary systems and barter networks were resilient and successful form of economic interactions for millennia.
Since the Paleolithic, Europe developed a system of value that came to play a unique role in world history. The existence of
pre-monetary economy shows to what extent prehistoric institutions, and social relations evolved and actively transformed
Europe, providing firm foundations for monetary systems in later times. Barter was at once a cornerstone of modern economic
theory and an ancient subject of debate about political justice, from Plato and Aristotle onwards. As an idea ‘barter’ is part of the
history of economics and archaeology, and the assumption that it was the forerunner of monetary exchange is crucial in the way
it is normally conceptualised. The requirement of immediate satisfaction of demand is paramount in barter systems. This is one
of the explanations of the rejection of monetisation in various prehistoric populations.
This session focusses on all aspects of prehistoric economy, excluding coinage. We welcome interdisciplinary cooperation of
archaeologists, economists, statisticians, anthropologists and theorists, who together can focus on fundamental questions,
which transcend national boundaries, bringing closer innovative ‘out-of-the-box’ understanding the economic foundations of
prehistoric world. Session invites a broad range of theme-orientated contributions focussing on, e.g. creation of economic value,
mathematic foundations of metric systems, theory of barter exchange, grain economy and surplus creation, trade related mobility studies, and interpretation of non-monetary finds. We particularly invite innovative contributions focusing on circulation of
archaic ‘proto-currencies’, ancient monopolies, maritime trade and structure of credit transactions, economic aspects of slavery and human trade in the past.
