SALT MINING IN THE CARPATHIAN BASIN IN 1650 – 800 BC
Author(s): Kavruk, Valerii (Romania: Iași - Al.I. Cuza University; Sfântu Gheorghe - The National Museum of Eastern Carpathians)
Presentation Format: Oral
The most substantial salt production sites in Transylvania and Maramureș date to ca. 1650 – 800 BC. The earliest of them (ca.
1650 – 1400 BC) are in the northeast Transylvania (Băile Figa and Săsarm). The sites are rich in timber structures: fences, roundish or rectangular structures, wattle-lined wells and multi-part constructions. Many wooden implements, tools and utensils have
been found on these sites. The most emblematic of them are the ‘troughs’ made of massive tree trunks, with a wide lateral
opening, axially perforated pegs inserted in the holes made in the trough base, and thin pointy sticks wrapped with vegetable
fiber inserted in the peg’s orifices.
The ‘trough package’ includes multi-purpose production equipment. It could work with various materials: water and brine (wells,
‘troughs’, gutters and pans), mud (troughs, pans, paddles and shovels), rock salt (stone hammers and wooden wedges), crumbly
salt (pans, paddles and shovels), as well as with timber (wooden sledge-hammers, splitting wedges, stone and bronze axes). All
of these suggest that the so-called trough technique was part of a complex production system that has dealt with various kinds
of raw material. Both the ethnographic analogies and experiments show the effectiveness of the ‘trough package’ implements
in various kinds of salt production techniques: rock salt drilling (by fresh water jets), salt mud filtering, brine decanting or/and
brine’s salinity rise.
Some implements and tools (stone mining tools, ladders, ropes, hummers, wedges etc.), as well as some presumed technique
actions (rock cracking using wooden wedges and sledge-hammers, water evacuation) suggest that the ‘trough technique’ of salt
production has been strongly influenced by or even rooted in copper mining techniques.
The ‘trough technique’ salt production appears to have been large-scale, high-tech and aimed at mass supply, and involved various social and professional groups.
