THE APPLICATION OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL ANALYSES OF OCCUPATION ON BELL BEAKER “ARCHER”
BURIALS IN EUROPE
Author(s): Ryan, Jessica - Desideri, Jocelyne (University of Geneva) - Villotte, Sébastien (University of Bordeaux) - Besse,
Marie (University of Geneva)
Presentation Format: Oral
Interpretations of individual identity are often based solely on archaeological context and basic osteological analyses. Studies
examining entheseal changes (modifications of musculoskeletal insertions) can provide archaeologists with a more complete
grasp of occupation and daily life in prehistoric populations.
This study uses such an anthropology-based methodology to respond to archaeological questions concerning the “archer” burials of the Eastern Bell Beaker complex (~2800-2000BC). Individuals interred with an archery context are currently interpreted as
archers. However, since the objects are possibly symbolic, there is no reason why their placement and function within the grave
could not also be symbolic. The first step of our study therefore requires an anthropological methodology aimed at identifying
traces of specialized archery, or not, on the skeleton in order to establish the relationship between the grave goods and the
individual. To do this, Bell Beaker individual inhumations from Lower Austria (n=9), Upper Austria (n=4), Bohemia (n=71), Moravia
(n=43), and Bavaria (n~80) were examined. Analyses include age and sex determinations, measurements, and the scoring of entheseal changes. The next, archaeological step of our study looks at the evidence for Neolithic warfare in general and Bell Beaker
archery specifically, with a focus on the concept of specialization.
Our results should provide three primary insights: the efficacy of using entheseal changes to interpret possible occupation, if
“archery” burials were for specialized archers, and the placement of a suspected archer within the greater population. These
responses may then provide insights to archaeological questions concerning the function of archery-related grave goods, the
implications of warfare on daily life, and the social organization within a society containing specialized warriors at the end of the
third millennium BC in Central Europe.
