MORE THAN SIZE: DOES SHAPE CONTRIBUTE TO MORPHOLOGICAL VARIATION BETWEEN CRANIA OF
AUROCHS (BOS PRIMIGENIUS) AND DOMESTIC CATTLE (BOS TAURUS)?
Author(s): Chipping, Ewan - Cox, Philip (The University of York)
Presentation Format: Oral
Since the aurochs (Bos primigenius) was domesticated into cattle (Bos taurus) they have been intrinsically intertwined with human agriculture. However, with successive transitions in husbandry practices from prehistory to the present it seems the extent
to which these two species differ from one another is unclear with the diversity of cattle ever increasing. This study is the first to
use geometric morphometric methods to quantify cranial morphology in aurochs and cows to evaluate shape variation between
them and to determine the degree to which this is an effect of size change. Crania dating from the Palaeolithic to present, over
190 British specimens, were modelled with photogrammetry to create 3D digital surfaces. The temporal diversity is intended to
assess how wild and domestic morphology is changing in line with husbandry practices. To measure this three landmark sets of
different sizes were then recorded to enable use of fragmentary remains. In shape only analyses, cows were discretely separated from aurochs, with aurochs crania being relatively longer and more narrow than those of domesticates. However, when adding
size, it was apparent this played a major role, contributing a large proportion of the total variance. Notably, the isolated population
of Chillingham cattle were found to be morphologically distinct from both aurochs and other domesticates. Much of the variation
was observed to occur in the posterior part of the cranium around the horns, which may be due to the anatomical architecture
required to support the large horns seen in aurochs. Selective breeding for increasingly docility via a reduction in horn and body
size may therefore be the most significant trait of human cattle husbandry. The morphological distinctiveness of Chillingham
cattle, which have been unmanaged by humans for over 400 years, indicates the fast rate at which anatomical variation can
occur in small and isolated populations.
