ACTS OF WARFARE OR RITUAL VIOLENCE IN THE HUNNIC PERIOD FROM THE HUNGARIAN PLAIN
Author(s): Masek, Zsófia (Institute of Archaeology, Research Centre for the Humanities, Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
Budapest) - Kocsis, Kinga (Roska Tamás Doctoral School of Sciences and Technology, Faculty of Information Technology and
Bionics, Pázmány Péter Catholic University, Budapest; Neuronal Network and Behavior Research Group, Institute of Cognitive
Neuroscience and Psychology, Research Center for Natural Sciences, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest) - Marcsik,
Antónia (Department of Biological Anthropology, University of Szeged) - Veres, Zsuzsanna (Northern Archaeological Associates Ltd.) - Hajdu, Tamás (Department of Biological Anthropology, Institute of Biology, Faculty of Science, Eötvös Loránd
University, Budapest)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the archaeological material of the Hungarian Plain the human remains from Roman-time settlements have been the subject of
debate for a long time. These remains may be mostly connected to the very last horizons of the Roman-time Barbarian (Sarmatian) settlements, i.e. to the so-called Late Sarmatian – Hunnic period. This paper discusses some of such assemblages, which
are linked together by the chronology (end of 4th – first half of the 5th c. AD) and the geographical proximity (Middle Tisza-region).
However, the anthropological assemblages differ in their main characteristics.
In one case, remains of three individuals were found in a former storage pit, which contained also a large number of more-or-less
whole vessels. Skulls of all three individuals wore unequivocal signs of perimortem trauma. In another case, complete skeletal
remains of nine further individuals were scattered in different parts of a contemporary settlement. Large quantity of burnt debris and rich pottery material in secondary position prove that the last phase of the Roman-time settlement suffered severe
destruction. However, the anthropological material does not show an undoubted picture of their possible violent death.
Here we are going to discuss the possible interpretations of these settlement materials with the help of refitting methods of the
pottery, using GIS-technology and scatter patterns which can help to decide whether these features may be treated as signs of
individual lethal violent acts, or a decisive phenomenon in the life of these settlements. At the same time, the anthropological
material and trauma investigations of these possible murder victims should be also discussed.
