CHANGING FOOD ECONOMIES IN LATE ROMAN AND EARLY ANGLO-SAXON BRITAIN: THE EVIDENCE
FROM CATTLE, SHEEP AND PIG HUSBANDRY
Author(s): Rizzetto, Mauro (University of Sheffield)
Presentation Format: Oral
The fall of the Roman Empire implied major political, socio-cultural, and economic changes in the former provinces and beyond.
In Roman Britain, intensive agricultural and animal husbandry practices allowed the production of a surplus which, either through
the markets or by direct supply, sustained the taxation cycle imposed by the Empire. The demise of such system bore important
consequences in the exploitation of domesticates; their material remains – animal bones and teeth – are therefore very wellplaced to inform on the changing nature of food economies in post-Roman Britain.
This paper focusses on changes in cattle, sheep and pig husbandry during the Late Roman-Early Anglo-Saxon transition in central-eastern Britain. In particular, biometrical analyses are employed to assess any change in the sizes of these three species, all
of which had been improved in Roman times. In Britain, the Roman animal economy mainly relied on cattle, which was intensively
exploited in agricultural activities and butchered for large-scale meat production. The results reveal a size reduction for cattle
during the Early Anglo-Saxon period; this is interpreted in light of the different, minor role played by cattle in post-Roman Britain.
In Early Anglo-Saxon animal husbandry, sheep was often more important than cattle; biometrical analyses indicate that sheep
size remains similar to that of Roman samples. Changes in the use of domesticates are also revealed by culling strategies, that
suggest a more generalised exploitation for the Early Anglo-Saxon period. These elements, as well as the complementary use of
other domestic species, such as pig, suggest that Early Anglo-Saxon communities had the skills and resources to actively adapt
to the new political and socio-economic conditions of post-Roman north-west Europe.
