ON THE LATÈNISATION OF EARLY LA TÈNE ELITE CULTURE IN THE LOWER RHINE/MEUSE REGION
Author(s): Roijmans, Nico (Free University Amsterdam)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Lower Rhine/Meuse region of the Southern Netherlands and Northeast Belgium has a small cluster of Early La Tène elite
burials, characterized by the deposition of bronze vessels, two-wheeled vehicles, horse harnesses, and often also weapons.
This group of burials forms the most northern off-shoot on the continent of an elite culture that has its origin in the Middle Rhine/
Moselle region and the Aisne/Marne region in Northern France.
The material culture of the graves informs us about elite connectivity in the 5th century BC when sets of prestigious objects
were imported from southern regions. The term ‘latènisation’ can be a useful concept here. It refers to a process of appropriation
and creative interpretation by local individuals and groups of La Tène material culture and associated values and social practices.
This definition enables us to understand the northward diffusion of La Tène elite culture in a more neutral and flexible way, without making an appeal to the problematic discourse of Celtic ethnicity and core-periphery models.
A first analysis of the evidence allows some interesting observations:
•
elites in our study area adopted southern burial practices and associated material culture, but also gave it a ‘couleur
locale’ by integrating it into a cremation ritual.
•
the influx of southern material culture should not only be explained in terms of exchange relations. Recent strontium-isotope research of a small group of inhumation burials from the Dutch river area (Kookter et al. 2017) points to a
heterogeneous composition of the population with evidence for immigration.
•
the tradition of Early La Tène elite burials seems to have been a short-lived phenomenon in our study area, already
breaking off in La Tène A. There is no evidence that cemeteries containing elite burials continued into La Tène C/D.
