ROMAN NON-ADULT CREMATIONS FROM BELGIUM: AN OSTEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE.
Author(s): Hlad, Marta - Veselka, Barbara - Stamataki, Elisavet (Maritime Cultures Research Institute, Department of Art
Sciences & Archaeology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel) - Sabaux, Charlotte (Department of Archaeology, Ghent University) - Sengeløv, Amanda (Anthropology and Human Genetics, Department of Biology of Organisms and Ecology, Université Libre de
Bruxelles) - De Mulder, Guy (Department of Archaeology, Ghent University) - Vercauteren, Martine (Anthropology and Human
Genetics, Department of Biology of Organisms and Ecology, Université Libre de Bruxelles) - Boudin, Mathieu (Royal Institute
for Cultural Heritage, Brussels) - Snoeck, Christophe (Analytical, Environmental & Geo-Chemistry, Department of Chemistry,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel; G-Time Laboratory, Université Libre de Bruxelles) - Tys, Dries (Maritime Cultures Research Institute,
Department of Art Sciences & Archaeology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
Presentation Format: Oral
Written sources from the Roman period provide information on how children were treated in roman society and how this perception was reflected in funerary practices. However, there are very few written sources discussing funerary rituals from the
provinces (such as Belgium). Most of these sources report on the lifestyles of the elites and discuss daily life in ancient Rome
and other Italian cities from that period.
This paper presents the results of the osteoarcheological analyses of Roman non-adult cremations from four Belgian sites and
discusses the results in the broader context of Northwestern Europe. The focus of the analysis is on discerning differences
and variations in funerary practices between children from different socioeconomical classes, difference between adult and
non-adult burial rituals, as well as understanding patterns in spatial organization of non-adult burials. The aim is also to compare
non-adult funerary practices of the provinces to that of the main Roman cities. In order to improve our understanding of funerary
rites for non-adults, a combination of osteoarchaeological evaluation, archaeological data and written sources is used. This will
add to a better understanding of the ”rite de passage” towards the tragic passing of the young from a comparative perspective.
This research is part of the CRUMBEL project (Cremation, Urns and Mobility in Belgium).
