INTRODUCTION TO THE SESSION: POTTERY AND CULTURAL LINKS DURING THE ROMAN AGE. SOME
QUESTIONS AND SOME METHODOLOGICAL PREMISES
Author(s): Giuman, Marco - De Luca, Gianna (Università di Cagliari)
Presentation Format: Oral
The study of pottery, in a hermeneutical perspective that today is strictly linked to an interdisciplinary approach, has always
been a fundamental element for the reconstruction of many important aspects of the ancient world. Pottery is an instrument
capable of conveying complex messages regarding the social status of users, but also an essential element in daily life, in the
conservation and transport of food and goods, as well as performing ritual functions. In fact, it can provide decisive answers to
the interpretation of many aspects of the ancient world. A careful comparative analysis, helped in recent decades by the use of
archaeometric techniques, allows us to obtain increasingly accurate information on the macro-economy of the ancient world, on
its domestic economy, on trade and on the evolution of its social structure. Given these general premises, it is precisely in this
perspective that ceramics constitute a fundamental marker in the recognition and evaluation of the mechanisms of cultural
interaction. This is obviously no exception to the Roman world. Here, the political-military expansion is constantly accompanied
by the spread of ceramic classes whose acquisition, in different geographical contexts, is diversified by time and manner depending on multiple factors. These can be, for example, the different pre-existing cultural substrates at the Romans came, the
different social level, the complex phenomena linked to the change of taste, the sequence of fashions and the needs of a commercial nature. This session therefore aims on the one hand to implement knowledge about these issues through the acquisition
of new data and contexts, and on the other hand to identify, as far as possible, the existence of common dynamics capable to
reconstruct a model in which periphery and center can be recognized as different parts of a single cultural system.
