INTERPRETING THE EARLY NEOLITHIC MASS GRAVE OF HALBERSTADT: VICTIMS OF CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT?
Author(s): Meyer, Christian (OsteoARC - OsteoArchaeological Research Centre) - Knipper, Corina (Curt Engelhorn Centre
Archaeometry gGmbH, Mannheim) - Nicklisch, Nicole (State Office for Heritage Management and Archaeology Saxony-Anhalt, Halle; Center of Natural and Cultural Human History, Danube Private University, Krems) - Münster, Angelina (Institute of
Anthropology, University of Mainz) - Kürbis, Olaf - Dresely, Veit - Meller, Harald (State Office for Heritage Management and
Archaeology Saxony-Anhalt, Halle) - Alt, Kurt (State Office for Heritage Management and Archaeology Saxony-Anhalt, Halle;
Center of Natural and Cultural Human History, Danube Private University, Krems; Integrative Prehistory and Archaeological
Science, University of Basel)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the Early Neolithic mass grave of Halberstadt, Germany, which was recently analysed by the authors, the skeletal remains of
at least nine individuals were found. The remains were incomplete due to several taphonomic factors but all surviving cranial
elements showed at least one perimortem blunt force trauma. In addition, postcranial elements also showed perimortem fractures that occurred before deposition in the irregular mass grave. This firmly points at collective violence as the reason for the
existence of this mass grave. The detailed analysis of the demographic profile of the victims, the manner of their deposition, the
patterning of their injuries and their isotopic signatures suggest a context different from previously known mass grave sites of
the same culture, the Linearbandkeramik (LBK). The victims were almost exclusively adult men who, according to the results of
the strontium, carbon and nitrogen isotope analyses, were non-local to the site. The cranial injuries clustered tightly at the back
of the head, probably indicating controlled execution of immobile prisoners rather than a chaotic massacre which was proposed
for other, contemporaneous sites. To understand the mass grave and the specific context in which the apparently organized application of lethal violence occurred, current knowledge about other sites of LBK regular burial, ritual and collective violence has
to be included in the interpretation to possibly differentiate between sanctioned violence via capital punishment or non-sanctioned “criminal” violence. It also becomes clear that a reference point for “sanctioned” and “non-sanctioned” violence has to be
defined, as the roles of perpetrators and victims most likely were fluid in prehistoric times without a centralized government but
with numerous independently acting groups of varying goals, size and influence.
