ARCHAEOLOGICAL FEATURES, SITE CATCHMENTS AND SEASONAL CYCLES – MULTI-PROXY
APPROACH TO PREHISTORIC FOREST SUBSISTENCE ECONOMY IN THE LEVENTINA VALLEY (TICINO)
Author(s): Della Casa, Philippe - Jacquat, Christiane (University of Zurich)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Bronze and Iron Age settlement of Airolo-Madrano TI was excavated during a larger project on prehistoric Alpine economy
in the years 2004–08 (cf. Della Casa, ZSA 12, 2018). It is situated at an altitude of 1150 masl on a hillock above the Leventina
valley floor, in an area situated at the climatic limits of Alpine crop cultivation. The excavations yielded abundant material finds
and biological macroremains, in particular grains, chaff and seeds of cereals (Hordeum, Triticum, Panicum), pulses (Pisum, Vicia)
and oily plants (Linum), as well as of wild plants with nutritional value, and animal bones. An all-year local subsistence economy
can be postulated, completed by the use of the abundant forests and subalpine pastures in the upper valley. The Airolo-Madrano
site catchment has been modeled using environmental parameters in GIS.
In the archaeological record, a number of stone-lined firing pits bordered by rows of pales stand out as conspicuous features
of subsistence/economic activities. Besides large amounts of cracked stones and charcoal, these pits always contain conifer needles, remains of cereals and other cultivated or gathered plants, burnt animal bones and ceramic shards, and are thus
interpreted as pit ovens (similar to ”fours polynésiens”). Such features are known from many Alpine and peri-Alpine sites of the
younger prehistoric periods.
Maintaining an all-year settlement in a remote mountain area such as the Leventina valley requires a great amount of effort in
the production, conservation and storage of (mostly seasonal) food products, in particular during wintertime. The phenomenon
of pit ovens can be discussed against the background of seasonal cycles, agricultural produce, food conservation techniques
(kiln drying, smoking, roasting) and nutritional needs within a labor-intensive forest subsistence economy as inferred for the
Airolo-Madrano village.
