WALL-E WAS AN ARCHAEOLOGIST: FUTURE ARCHAEOLOGY AS AN EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY
Author(s): Moshenska, Gabriel (University College London, Institute of archaeology)
Presentation Format: Oral
Given that the Capitalocene is an unstoppable engine of death it is obviously vital that we consider the future of archaeology. In
this paper I imagine the archaeologists of the future as hybrid scholar-salvagers, studying and recording as they tear apart dead,
drowning cities in search of reusable materials.
The current field of preventative archaeology is based on a principle of continuous growth, a view of archaeological heritage as
a non-renewable resource, and a laughable reluctance to consider the commodity values of archaeological artefacts. We dig,
we archive our finds, and new infrastructure grows from the sterile holes we leave behind. This model – and the global capitalist
society that drives it – are unsustainable.
Any survivable future for humanity will rest on limiting growth, on the careful management of resources for sustainability not
profit, and on a managed transformation of the material world to meet the needs of a future sustainable society. In this vision of
the future, production and growth based on natural resources will by necessity be replaced by a large-scale recycling, repurposing, and managed destruction of the human-made material world. As we build new habitats we will by necessity strip the burned
or drowned cities of their wires, pipes, bricks, rebar, structural plastics, organic materials and steel frames, leaving hollow ruins.
Let us therefore imagine the archaeologist of the future: a skilled salvage worker, trained [or programmed – they are unlikely to
be human] in both the recognition and retrieval of valuable resources and in their recording and interpretation. The skills in managed destruction remain the same: the fundamental transformation will be in the understanding of archaeology as an extractive
industry, of artefacts as commodities destined not for archival stasis but for repurposing in the service of society.
