SEMANTIC WEB APPLICATIONS AND PUBLIC OUTREACH. EXPLORING THE ÇATALHÖYÜK DATABASE
Author(s): Marciniak, Arkadiusz - Filipowicz, Patrycja - Harabasz, Katarzyna - Hordecki, Jędrzej (Adam Mickiewicz University)
Presentation Format: Oral
The storage, curation and sharing of large, complex and diverse data acquired during 25 years of excavations at Çatalhöyük poses a real challenge. In this paper we aim at discussing the relevance of this multifaceted database for the purposes other than
research goals advocated by the Çatalhöyük Research Project and not explicitly designed by its creators. It will exemplified by
the analysis of two major applications: Seshat and Hatch.
Seshat is the massive collection of historical information allowing the rigorous testing of different hypotheses about large-scale
societies across the globe and human history. It was developed in the era of big-data. It extracts the data from a combination of
databases, Linked Data, web sites, academic publications and human experts. The paper shall discuss possibilities of harvesting
complex archaeological databases, such as Çatalhöyük datasets, and conforming information to other structured or semi-structured formalisms and map it to the RDF data model. Some emerging challenges comprise e.g. changing research perspectives
from micro (site) to macro levels or transition from ‘raw’ excavation data to more complex variables.
Hatch it is an advanced and innovative class of systems designed to create and maintain digital collections. It is aimed at presenting a wide range of data about Çatalhöyük in a multiscalar and interactive form, linking information of different characters
(types of objects, relations among them, etc.) with different forms of their presentation (text, photographs, graphics, etc.). It has
didactic objectives and is designed to meet the needs and expectations of both professionals and the general public interested
in the human past. The paper will discuss the relevance and usefulness of Çatalhöyük datasets for the purpose of this multi-dimensional interactive open digital educational collection. In both cases, the multiscalar problems of intellectual property right
will be critically evaluated.
