«PERIPHERAL GRAZING» - AN ISOTOPIC INVESTIGATION OF PREHISTORIC ANIMAL HUSBANDRY IN THE
SWISS ALPS
Author(s): Gerling, Claudia (University of Basel, Integrative Prehistory and Archaeological Science) - Doppler, Thomas (Kanton
Aargau, Departement Bildung, Kultur, Sport, Abteilung Kultur, Kantonsarchäologie) - Kruse, Kristin (Canton of Zurich, Building
Department, Office for Spatial Development, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage) - Pike, Alistair (University of Southampton,
Department of Archaeology) - Reitmaier, Thomas (Archaeological Service of the Canton of Grisons)
Presentation Format: Oral
Alpine high mountain valleys have not always been in the centre of interest of archaeological research, mainly due to the infrequency of archaeological remains in these heights but also due to the difficulty of identifying human impact beyond settlements. Melting glaciers and the recent discovery of spectacular finds have, however, strongly increased the interest in high
alpine archaeology. Furthermore, “new” methods facilitate the exploration of the peripheries of alpine settlement sites.
For more than a decade, Alpine pastoral economy in the Lower Engadine (Grisons, Switzerland) has been investigated using a
large variety of disciplines. Archaeological evidence revealed the contemporary existence of settlement sites in the valleys
and high-altitude huts and animal pens indicating the seasonal presence of humans and animals in these high mountain valleys
and as early as the Bronze and Iron Age. Moreover, organic residue analyses have (for the first time in this Alpine region) proven
alpine dairy production for the Late Bronze Age. Isotopic analysis provides the potential to directly access seasonal animal mobility. Here, we present the results of strontium LA-ICP-MC-MS and oxygen isotope analyses of cattle (18–9th cent. BC) from
the settlement of Ramosch-Mottata in the Lower Engadine. Combined with a GIS- and equation based scenario evaluation on
economic strategies and the theoretical carrying capacity of the settlement, we try to gain a better understanding of land use,
animal keeping patterns and the relation between the high-altitude archaeological structures and the valley settlements. The
combination of different methodological approaches shows a clear socioeconomic shift in alpine animal husbandry and the vertical pastoral exploitation during the Bronze Age in the Inner Alps, possibly in order to increase the output of agricultural produce
for exchange within and beyond the Alpine region.
