ADAPTATION OF CIRCULAR MODELS FOR GLOBAL HERITAGE CITIES: REGENERATION OF ISTANBUL
WORLD HERITAGE SITE AS A CASE STUDY
Author(s): Ikiz Kaya, Deniz (Eindhoven University of Technology; Ozyegin University)
Presentation Format: Oral
In this rapidly globalising world, managing change in historic cities while promoting their sustainable development has been a
daunting task. It is further complicated for global heritage cities, defining historic urban landscapes (HUL) designated as World
Heritage Sites within global cities, by a number of issues: engagement with global actors in addition to a broad range of stakeholders; increasing complexity of legislative, administrative and operational systems; and the imperative to engage local communities meaningfully in sustainable development and management processes. Acknowledged as leverage for more inclusive,
safe and resilient cities, cultural heritage and HUL conservation play a crucial role here as drivers of sustainable development.
UNESCO’s HUL Recommendation has presented interdisciplinary tools to cope with these challenges, and new management
models have been developed to further operationalise these principles.
The circular economy model has been proposed to understand the complex relationships between wide range of values and
stakeholders, to valorise these resources in synergistic means, and to illustrate the symbiosis between conservation and development. This approach however requires new evaluation and management tools to be developed and tested. In this research,
hence, a regeneration project implemented in the Istanbul WHS will be examined as a case study to provide empirical evidence
of the economic, social and cultural benefits of this synergy within globalised urban context. Initially, cultural, natural and human
resources of the site, and its impact on the values will be investigated. Then, social network analysis and cognitive mapping
techniques will be employed to map out the complexity of decision making, followed by the analysis of their unique management
tools and strategies. This assessment will complement the examination of existing operative tools and will test some of the key
indicators introduced by the circular economy model through the employment of an innovative mixed methodology and a novel
case study.
