THE END OF THE LOWER PALEOLITHIC IN THE LEVANT: THE LATE ACHEULIAN AND ACHEULOYABRUDIAN TECHNOCOMPLEXES (MIS 12-8)
Author(s): Zaidner, Yossi (Hebrew University of Jerusalem) - Meignen, Liliane (CNRS)
Presentation Format: Oral
Given its geographical location on out-of-Africa dispersal route and its well-preserved archaeological records dated to 400,000150,000 years ago, the Near East plays an important role in understanding the new technical behaviors that emerge at the Lower
–Middle Paleolithic boundary. In the Levant, this period witnessed a succession of three technocomplexes: the Late Acheulian,
the Acheulo-Yabrudian and the Early Middle Paleolithic. In this paper, we present the main characteristics of the late Lower Paleolithic (Late Acheulian and Acheulo-Yabrudian technocomplexes).
The Late Acheulian is known from a number of open-air and cave sites, found both in Mediterranean and arid zones of the Levant.
The lithic industries are characterized by the production of handaxes and roughly-made flake tools from simple cores. Although
some indication for possible use of the Levallois technology was mentioned, it was not confirmed in more recent studies of new
Late Acheulian assemblages.
Always found in stratigraphic position above the Late Acheulian, the Acheulo-Yabrudian techno-complex was only identified in
the Northern and Central Levant. Similarly to the late Acheulian, the Acheulo-Yabrudian is characterized by the use of bifacial
technology and simple flake production. It also contains two new elements: a specific core reduction for thick flakes production,
which were often transformed into Quina scrapers and the earliest systematic blade production in this region. These components occur in the majority of the assemblages of this technocomplex, but in different proportions, thus resulting in a remarkable technological diversity. Levallois technology is absent.
Opinions vary on whether the Acheulo-Yabrudian technology is routed within the ‘old’ and simple Acheulian flake production or
heralds the advent of a new Middle Paleolithic world. We will present the main characteristics of the two technocomplexes and
address the question of the origin of Acheulo-Yabrudian on basis of the data from recently studied Acheulo-Yabrudian assemblages.
