HOW DO WE KNOW WHAT THEY WERE THINKING? ARCHAEOASTRONOMY BETWEEN SCIENCE AND
SPECULATION – PALAEOLITHIC CASE STUDIES
Author(s): Rappenglück, Michael (SEAC)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeoastronomy, as part of Cultural Astronomy, is popular, extremely effective in the media and marketable. The fascination
paired with a maximum of fantasy, with little or no methodical claim at all, moves some to interpret archaeological objects only
from an (today’s) astronomical point of view. A growing number of such constructs, the majority of which are dubious and methodologically unfounded, are published in the media worldwide, giving a distorted picture of archaeoastronomy, its justification,
its research objects, methods, results and limits. It is therefore necessary to discuss methodological questions of archaeoastronomy and to work out the demarcation problem between non-science, fringe-science and science. This will be done using case
studies from the Palaeolithic and Epipalaeolithic archaeological inventory. Scientific research dealing with possible astronomical
(and mathematical) knowledge of that period needs an appropriate methodology. Hitherto, approaches are focused mostly on
partial interpretations, e.g. archaeological, economic, social, psychical, artistic, or technical ones. Archaic cultures however applied multiple levels of meaning to phenomena and objects of their lifeworld, making intensive use of symbolic, mythical and ritual
forms of representation. In order to recognize and prove archaic astronomy, an interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary, multi-faceted and broadly-based variety of methods is necessary (“Integral Method”): Dates and diversity of approaches from the natural
sciences and the humanities, each critically evaluated, are combined for achieving a maximum of mutual comprehensibility. It
follows the hermeneutic spiral as a process of securing integrative understanding and could rely on the model of coherence of
findings. The methodological elements of archaeological reconstruction, astronomical analysis and comparative interpretation
(iconography, mythology, historical tradition) are combined to ensure the highest possible coherence and correctness of argumentation and evidence for a hypothesis / theory. The lecture concentrates mainly on different astronomical interpretations of
mobile and parietal art, certain artefacts, landscape features, and natural or artificial structures.
