LIVESTOCK MANAGEMENT AND HERDING STRATEGIES ON AN ALPINE SITE DURING MEDIEVAL AND
MODERN PERIODS BY ZOOARCHEOLOGY, PROTEOMICS AND ISOTOPIC ANALYSES
Author(s): Knockaert, Juliette (Department of Archaeology, University of York) - Lebole, Chiara - Di Gangi, Giorgio - Mascarello,
Chiara (Dipartimento di Studi Storici, University of Turin) - Sartorio, Gabriele (Patrimonio Archeologico, Aosta) - Pike, Alistair
(Department of Archaeology, University of Southampton) - Orton, David - Walsh, Kevin (Department of Archaeology, University
of York)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Petit Saint-Bernard Pass is an important node of communication in the Western Alps but has also been a pastoral area since
the late Neolithic. According to palaeoenvironmental analyses, an intensification of the pastoral activities around the pass appears during the Medieval and Modern periods. Recent excavations on the alpine site of Orgères (1665 a.s.l., Vallon des Chavannes- Italy), located on an alternative route between France and Italy to that offered by the Petit-Saint-Bernard Pass, revealed
two main occupation phases: the medieval (VIII-XVe centuries) and post-medieval (XVII-XVIIIe centuries) periods. Supra-regional
and transalpine interaction, based on the trade of dairy products, would have linked lowland urban sites with those at higher
altitudes. Within this network, the exogenous origin and/or seasonal mobility of the domestic livestock could be considered.
The study of the faunal remains represents a rare opportunity to assess the livestock management and herding strategies in a
high-altitude settlement, located in a pastoral landscape. For this purpose, we combine zooarchaeology, molecular techniques,
including ZooArchaeology by Mass Spectrometry (ZooMS) and isotopic analyses.
The zooarchaeological study has highlighted important breeding activities; mainly focused on the exploitation of caprines. The
distinction between sheep and goat is crucial to characterise the specific composition of the livestock and the associated production strategies. This has been investigated by the anatomical criteria and the peptide fingerprinting characterization (ZooMs)
of bone collagen. Because the study area is characterized by a mosaic of geological substrates of various ages and a large altitudinal gradient, the vertical mobility of the domestic caprine can be tested by oxygen and strontium isotopic analyses.
This research adopts a diachronic approach and incorporates local paleoenvironmental data, the results allow us to discuss the
continuity and changes of the herding strategies in an alpine location and contribute to the understanding the long-term development of mountain societies.
