COMMUNITIES AT THE COALFACE: SHARING PERSPECTIVES ON COASTAL LOSS
Author(s): Graham, Ellie (The SCAPE Trust; University of St Andrews) - Dawson, Tom (University of St Andrews; The SCAPE
Trust) - Hambly, Joanna (The SCAPE Trust; University of St Andrews)
Presentation Format: Oral
Coastlines are often fragile and dynamic environments. They are especially vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, with
rising sea levels and increasing wave height exacerbating natural coastal processes of change, loss and erosion. In many countries, they are also historically focal points of settlement and activity; consequently, concentrations of archaeological sites are
particularly at risk from these threats.
In Scotland, the SCAPE Trust has built on 25 years of coastal survey to develop methods of prioritisation, assessing a site’s
archaeological significance and vulnerability to coastal processes. By taking a citizen science approach to data-gathering, this
work has incorporated a range of values into judgements of importance. Analysis of the results has been undertaken in partnership with heritage managers, practitioners and communities, and shared with regional and national policy-makers.
The Learning From Loss project then brought together an international team of researchers, practitioners and local stakeholders
to address the global questions of how significance should be assigned to sites and priorities identified. It examined the range of
criteria that can be incorporated and the perspectives that can be included when we have to make difficult decisions and accept
that not everything can be saved. Different concepts and metrics of value were considered and options for potential responses
discussed, from practical work at site-specific level to pragmatic strategies to mitigate the threat of loss.
This paper will explore some of these issues and examine how this collaborative work has contributed to the development of
robust systems for responding to the threat posed to heritage sites by climate change.
