EVERYTHING GOES BACK TO DUST: PXRF AS A TOOL TO INVESTIGATE SPACE FUNCTION AND
ORGANISATION
Author(s): Save, Sabrina (Amélie SARL)
Presentation Format: Oral
As well stated in this session resume, pXRF has experienced a recent boom in archaeology in the past decades, its most common
and established use being provenancing obsidian and volcanic rocks. While the use of pXRF is still struggling to assert itself in
the study of other types of artefacts, facing a mix of methodological and ideological battles, pXRF should not be restricted to
the analysis of artefacts only.
Geochemical surveys and soil analysis have been developed in archaeology since several decades to investigate space function
and site organisation. Different analytical methods are currently in use: phosphate concentration, ICP-OES, ICP-MS, XRF and
pXRF. Except for pXRF and the in-field method to measure phosphate concentration, all technics require expensive lab-based
equipments and/or time-consuming processing and preparation of samples. The constant improvement in precision and accuracy of the equipment, and the rapidity and cost-effectiveness of the measurements make pXRF a serious challenger to lab-based
equipment and an ideal method for Developer-funded Archaeology.
The efficiency and relevance of geochemical surveys is no more to prove. Often used in combination with other proxies like
geophysics and micromorphology, it provides an inequivalent insight of microscopic soil pollution generated by past human activities and thus can explain or confirm the function of features and spaces.
In the aim to develop further geochemical surveys and make them available in terms of budget and time-frame to the global archaeological community, we developed a new method to survey extensive archaeological surfaces with pXRF to investigate, at
both large and local scale, human impact on soil chemistry. In this paper, we will present examples of studies we have undertaken
in various contexts to illustrate the potential of pXRF in the investigation of space function and organisation, and discuss the
perspectives of its development in the near future.
