PREHISTORIC WATER TRANSPORT OF THE EAST EUROPEAN PLAIN: DUGOUTS AND/OR SOMETHING
ELSE?
Author(s): Kashina, Ekaterina - Gak, Evgeniy (State Historical Museum, Department of Archaeology) - Okorokov, Aleksandr
(Russian Research Institute of Cultural and Natural Heritage)
Presentation Format: Oral
During the whole mankind history the water transport took the important role in fishing. Several dozens of dugouts have been
found in river sediments and peat-bogs of the East European Plain. The chronology of these boats partly could belong to the
Prehistoric epoch, but it can be prooved only by the C14 dating of wood. Our project (Russian Foundation of Basic Research
19-09-00301) aims to investigate all so far known European Russian dugouts by specifying their age, revealing the typology
and functional features. The dugout typology can not constitute the chronological sequence base. Sometimes the most simple
dugouts were dated by C14 as the latest. Moreover, it is of great interest whether some other watercraft types existed here during the Stone and Bronze Ages, e.g., skin boats or birch bark canoes, the remains of which are invisible in archaeological records.
Either they could have been possibly simultaneous to dugouts or their development took place in separate regions. The watercraft functionality is also of the great importance. The use of relatively small skin/birch bark boats for undividual/family fishing/
hunting inside the limited area could be proposed as a main watercraft function of forest hunter-gatherer-fisher communities.
The use of long dugouts for fishing at the lagoons of Eastern Baltic has parallels in Ertebölle archaeological contexts. During
the later Prehistoric period, large and firm oak dugouts were probably more common and aimed to carry people and/or cargo for
example along the large Don River. The petroglyphic representations at Lake Onega and the White Sea illustrates the use of large
skin boats for seal and white whale hunting, though the boat remains are still unknown at the sites.
