ON THE ROLE OF ASTRONOMY IN THE FORMATION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES: EGYPT IN THE OLD
KINGDOM
Author(s): Belmonte Avilés, Juan Antonio (Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Old Kingdom in Egypt represents the culmination of a long and intricate process of interaction between the members of a
formative society and their landscape, as represented by the Nile Valley and the surrounding Western and Eastern deserts, or
semi-deserts. Sadly, the role of the local skyscape in this process is often underestimated when not simply ignored. However,
as we will show, the observation of the sky played a significant role in the creation, and success, of ancient Egyptian society.
Astronomy is one of the oldest scientific approaches for the comprehension of nature. Every single society in history has been
familiar with one or another aspect of sky-watching, helping people to find their correct place in space and time and hence in
cosmic order (Ma’at in ancient Egypt). Indeed, one significant aspect of heaven observation was the creation of metaphysics, i.e.
a cosmology or worldview, since the endurable skies were a source of inspiration for human transcendence.
Egypt in the Old Kingdom is a paradigm of a majority of these aspects. First, an innovative and extremely useful calendar was
invented in the transitional period between the 2nd and the 3rd Dynasties, the so-called civil calendar that will survive for millennia. Its origin is still a matter of controversy. Second, both an astral and a solar eschatology were developed, creating a complex
but fascinating belief system whose echoes are still heard today. To accomplish this, skies were mapped and the movements of
the celestial bodies, studied, analyzed and interpreted within Egypt’s cultural context. Finally, architecture, from humble mastabas to skyscraping pyramids would be a reflection of this worldview in their location, orientation and design.
This talk will present updated and necessarily brief snapshots of these fundamental aspects, presenting, whenever possible,
innovative ideas and tentative solutions to long standing controversial issues.
