SALONS ARCHÉOLOGIQUES – AN INITIATIVE TO QUESTION ARCHAEOLOGY FROM A CITIZEN’S
PERSPECTIVE
Author(s): Dunning, Ellinor (ArchaeoConcept; University of Neuchâtel) - Aeschimann, Camille (ArchaeoConcept)
Presentation Format: Oral
What happens when archaeologists really meet the broader population? Practically, how to allow people to co-define the value of
cultural heritage, and discuss the roles archaeology plays in their and our lives? How to expose our views and define our roles as
archaeologists, in front of different unknown audiences?
The apparatus of the Salons archéologiques, a participatory project aiming to understand the representations of the Swiss population on heritage and archaeology, allows “them” and “us” to regularly meet and share our narratives upon the past and its
role in our society. The Salons are organised on a regular basis in private flats, in a very intimate and relaxed way, outside of any
institutional context. As such, they blur the lines between public and private spaces, and offer a mode of sociability based on
direct exchange and trust.
Participants are invited to share their souvenirs, emotions, experiences, definitions, imaginaries and ask questions to the archaeologists. They also give their opinion upon the societal values they assign to heritage, and express their views upon the
practical functioning of the research. During these moments, archaeologists themselves are led to express their own view, and
to confront it with the opinions of the participants, who do not necessarily have the same registers of values concerning the
past. On which aspects do “them” and “us” agree and on which other differences arise?
With this project we create “intermediary zones” where different people could actually meet, share qualitative moments and live
experiences, doing what could be called “citizen science”. This “liminarity” between two normally separated spheres is going to
be discussed in this paper, as well as the apparatus itself of the Salons archéologiques, seen as an effective way to question our
roles and the way we want to create and share the knowledge we produce.
