THE CONVERSION OF MOSQUES INTO CHURCHES IN GREEK MACEDONIA AFTER ITS ABSORPTION TO
THE GREEK STATE (1912-1913)
Author(s): Stavridopoulos, Ioannis (University of Aegean)
Presentation Format: Oral
The religious reuse of buildings that had served other cults has been an old and common practice since antiquity. When Christianity became the state religion of the Roman Empire, most pagan temples were converted into churches. The symbols of the
old faith were either removed or destroyed but the buildings continued to be used as sacred spaces. There are many similar
examples from different parts of the world and from different historical periods. In Iberia after the Moorish conquest, churches
were converted into mosques. After the Reconquista, mosques were converted into churches. The reasons for the reuse vary
and are dependent on the historical context. The main reason could have been practical but there is also symbolism involved in
these actions and in some occasions, respect of the sacred space. The reuse of a building does not erase its material presence
nor its past history, it only inscribes to it new cultural, social or political meanings. It is another chapter in the cultural biography of
the monument. When the Ottomans conquered Macedonia in the 15th century, they gradually converted the Byzantine churches
into mosques. In 1912, after the Balkan Wars and the defeat of the Ottoman Empire, Macedonia became a province of the Greek
state. During same year, all the Byzantine churches of Thessaloniki converted in the past into mosques were reconsecrated
back to the Christian religion. In 1924-1925 after the Treaty of Lausanne thousands of Muslims from Greek Macedonia were exchanged with thousands of Greeks from Turkey. Many mosques in cities and villages were converted into churches. In this paper
I will present how this was practiced and to what extent. I will also present some surviving architectural examples and discuss
issues concerning their identity as carriers of different temporalities and memories.
