EXPERIMENTAL BURNING AS A METHOD OF STUDY OF THE ANTIQUE CREMATION TECHNIQUE
Author(s): Svirkina, Natalya - Volodin, Semen (Institute of Archaeology Russian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
The series of experimental cremations was carried out within the framework of research project dedicated to the study of antique cremation from the Phanagoria necropolis (Taman Peninsula, Krasnodarsky Krai, Russia). The purpose was to reconstruct
the burial rite and clarify such details as construction of the funeral pyre, its duration and temperature, body position, wood type.
The experiment based on the evidences from archaeological, written and graphic sources of the antique era. Cremation took
place outdoors and about 2.5 m3 of oak firewood was used to create a funeral pyre. We used the pig corpse weighing about 50
kg. It was placed on the top of the construction. The cremation lasted for 4 hours and 55 minutes. The temperature of the pyre
ranged from 611 to 940 °C. The total weight of the remains was about 650 grams. The size of cremated bones fragments did
not exceed 80 mm. The color of fragments ranged from brown and black to white. On the several fragment the light-pink, yellow
and blue colored pigmentation have been identified. There are no traces of direct exposure to heat on some bones (sacrum, ilia,
femur). We noticed only straight cracks on the bone fragments. Parabolic cracks or deformations are not detectable.
We can conclude that oak is the optimal fuel for high-temperature outdoors cremation. The duration of burning in this case lasts
at least for 5 hours at 600-940 °C. Moreover, funeral pyre should be organized in the way when body is exposed to heat from all
sides even after destruction of pyre construction.
The obtained cremated remains differ from antique analogies. The reasons for this difference may be in miscalculations during
experiment or unaccounted funeral rite details. The experiment results also revealed a range of methodological issues questions. The study supported by RFBR #18-39-00154.
