LAND-USE AND HUMAN OCCUPATION IN TER HIGH MOUNTAIN VALLEYS (EASTERN PYRENEES, SPAIN):
A LONG-TERM AND MULTIDISCIPLINARY LANDSCAPE RESEARCH
Author(s): Palet, Josep Maria (Institut Català d’Arqueologia Clàssica) - Garcia, Arnau (McDonald Institute for Archaeological
research. University of Cambridge) - Polonio, Tania - Colominas, Lídia - Orengo, Hèctor Aleix (GIAP. Institut Català d’Arqueologia
Clàssica) - Pescini, Valentina - Fossati, Massimiliano (Laboratorio di Archeologia e Storia Ambientale - LASA. Dipartimento di
Antichità, Filosofia, Storia e Geografia - DAFIST. Università degli Studi di Genova)
Presentation Format: Oral
Since 2010, an integrated landscape research has been developed in Ter high mountain valleys (Eastern Pyrenees), with the aim
of studying the long-term landscape change of these Mediterranean high-mountain environments. This programme involved extensive surveying, GIS, excavation and radiocarbon dating of archaeological structures and the integration of bioarchaeological
and palaeoenvironmental data. The project has been thus designed from a landscape archaeology perspective in order to treat
these data as cultural proxies. The results underline the importance of livestock management in these high-mountain areas
which were well-integrated in extra-regional trade networks from the Neolithic onwards.
The first landscape change occurred in the valleys since the Middle Neolithic-Late Neolithic transition (~3600 cal BC) until the
Early Bronze age (~ 1600 cal BC) when the alpine grassland belt expanded and human settlements have been documented at ca.
2,500 m a.s.l. Archaeobiological record (charcoal analyses) and micromorphology give new insides to characterized past landuse practises and landscape change which included fire-driven forest openings and grazing activities. Roman times report an
important period in livestock expansion, with an especial intensity from the 2nd – 3rd centuries and during Late Antiquity. In this
period, these valleys become integrated in the Roman economic sphere. Specialised pastoral practices for regional and extra
regional distribution are also attested. Landscape dynamics show a new expansion from the high middle Ages (9th 10th c.), with
the reuse of Roman structures and the construction of new ones clearly more specialized (cheese production). This phase is well
attested in the paleoenvironmental and archaeobiological record. Finally, data attests a new phase of pastoralism expansion
from the 14th-15th c. to modern and contemporary periods.
