ARCHAEOLOGY IN NORTHEAST HONDURAS: NEW PERSPECTIVES FROM A FRONTIER ZONE
Author(s): Fecher, Franziska (University of Zurich) - Reindel, Markus (German Archaeological Institute) - Fux, Peter (Museum
Rietberg Zurich; University of Zurich) - Cruz Castillo, Oscar (Honduran Institute for Anthropology and History) - Della Casa,
Philippe (University of Zurich)
Presentation Format: Oral
From an archaeological perspective, the modern territory of Honduras is divided into two parts. The western part belongs to the
Mesoamerican culture region, while the east is part of the Isthmo-Colombian Area. Although the frontier between these culture
regions cannot be understood as impermeable or stable, there are clear differences in the archaeological landscape. Early investigators were impressed by the temples, stelae and hieroglyphic inscriptions they found in the west, especially in the Maya city
of Copan, which today ranks among the most intensively investigated Maya sites. In contrast, the further one goes east, the less
visible the archaeological remains are. This is a reason why the region has long been neglected by archaeologists and information
on its pre-Hispanic inhabitants is scant. In the beginning of its investigation, archaeologists searched for cultural influences and
regional cultures were compared to their more “complex” and better understood neighbors in the west. The Proyecto Arqueológico Guadalupe builds on previous projects that were trying to change the view of northeast Honduras as being peripheral or a passive receptor of cultural influences. Investigations in the Cocal-period (1000-1525 AD) settlement of Guadalupe are addressing
questions about cultural and economic developments from a local perspective. Scientific analysis of the extensive materials
excavated allows specific statements about local subsistence strategies and networks of economic and social interaction. Preliminary results show that the region cannot be conceived of as dependent or peripheral, but instead subsistence was centered
around local resources and obsidian blades with ceramics likely being produced at the site. At the same time, the import of single
prestige objects show far reaching connections to Guatemala, Mexico and Costa Rica.
