THE RECONSTRUCTION OF NEOLITHIC CERAMICS – MULTI-SCALE MEASUREMENT ANALYSIS FROM
P-ED-XRF SIGNATURES VIA X-RAY FLUORESCENCE ANALYSIS TO X-RAY MICROTOMOGRAPHY SCANS
Author(s): Menne, Julia (Institute of Pre- and Protohistoric Archaeology, Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel) - Heilmann,
Christopher - Holzheid, Astrid (Institute of Geosciences - Experimental and Theoretical Petrology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel)
Presentation Format: Oral
It is assumed that the p-ed-XRF measurements provide sufficient and accurate results. The investigation of ancient pottery
with regard to their material composites allows insights into the material structures, production techniques and manufacturing
processes. For this reason, additionally to conventional microscopic examination and petrographic thin sections, multi-element
analyses of portable ed-XRF (p-ed-XRF) have become more and more important for archaeological research questions. As a result, the number of ceramic studies using this method has increased enormously in recent years.
In this paper, a comparison of the different methods is made to evaluate the methodological limitations and the comparability of
these ceramic analysis. We want to investigate the measurement accuracy and compare the quantitative measurements of a
portable Niton XL3t900-ed-XRF-device to the conventional quantitative data from a wavelength XRF device (w-d-XRF) to determine the limits of precision. In addition, material structures using x-ray microtomography scans (μ-CT) were studied, which made
it possible to extract the temper components and the related porosity non-destructively. The aim of this study is to investigate
the methodological relationship between the various established methods of ceramic analysis in order to evaluate the quality of
these measurement techniques for a precise comparison of their reliability and applicability. In our opinion, this approach offers
the possibility to verify and extend the proven methods and to open up new fields of application.
As a case study, the elemental contents of the ceramics of megalithic tombs were measured. The used samples derive from
megalithic tombs of the Funnelbeaker Westgroup in northwestern Germany. For the first time, a comprehensive methodological
investigation of the geochemical analyses and their limits can be carried out on this Neolithic ceramic.
