ENTHESEAL CHANGES UNDER DEBATE: FIRST RESULTS FROM THE SKELETAL COLLECTION OF THE
CHALCOLITHIC SITE OF CAMINO DEL MOLINO (MURCIA, SPAIN)
Author(s): Perez-Arzak, Uxue (Department of Geography, Prehistory and Archaeology. University of Basque Country - EHUUPV) - Haber-Uriarte, María - Lomba-Maurandi, Joaquín (Department of Prehistory, Archaeology, Ancient History, Medieval
History and Historiographic Science and Techniques. University of Murcia - UM) - Arrizabalaga, Alvaro (Department of Geography, Prehistory and Archaeology. University of Basque Country - EHU-UPV) - Trancho, Gonzalo J. (Department of Zoology and
Physical Anthropology. Complutense University of Madrid - UCM)
Presentation Format: Poster
The entheseal changes (ECs), changes of the muscular, tendinous and ligamentous attachment sites of the bone, are features
that have been used extensively to reconstruct activity from the human skeleton. Especially since the 1980s, there have been
a lot of studies concerning these changes and their doubtful etiology.
The aim of this work is to contribute to this debate using the first results obtained from the analyses on Camino del Molino’s
sample. In this site, multiple burial was practised around the period between 2920-2340 BC. Both the material culture and the
faunal remains suggest that these individuals probably practised agricultural and farming activities.
In this case, the upper limbs of 91 individualized adult subjects (39 male, 34 female, 18 indeterminate) are analysed macroscopically with the Santana’s method (2011), scoring the entheseal changes in a five-degree scale (0-4). The statistics are completed
with SPSS v.24.
The results do not show any significant intra-group differences. The lower scores are particularly significant (with higher frequencies in women) and, in general, there is a great homogeneity in the pattern of ECs. In addition, the association between age
and ECs has been verified. Focusing on the nature of the entheses, the fibrocartilaginous ones show higher degrees - close to
pathology- which indicate that biomechanical factors are also influencing the presence of these changes.
As a summary, the results of ECs in the Camino del Molino´s sample are compatible with an agricultural society in which the sexual division of labour seems to be present but in a slight way since all members would participate in the economical organisation.
Moreover, the multifactorial nature of the entheseal changes cannot be questioned. Currently, biologically more appropriate
methodologies are being applied in this sample to reduce biases and to contrast the conclusions obtained in this study.
