STARQ - THE CASE OF THE PORTUGUESE TRADE UNION FOR ARCHAEOLOGISTS
Author(s): Simões, Sara (Cambridge Archaeological Unit, University of Cambridge; STARQ - Sindicato dos Trabalhadores de
Arqueologia) - Barbosa, Regis (STARQ - Sindicato dos Trabalhadores de Arqueologia) - Bugalhão, Jacinta (STARQ - Sindicato
dos Trabalhadores de Arqueologia; UNIARQ – Centro de Arqueologia da Universidade de Lisboa, Faculdade de Letras; Centro
de Estudos em Arqueologia, Artes e Ciências do Património) - de Carvalho, Liliana (STARQ - Sindicato dos Trabalhadores de
Arqueologia; CIAS - Centro de Antropologia e Saúde, Department of Life Sciences, University of Coimbra) - Peace, Richard
(STARQ - Sindicato dos Trabalhadores de Arqueologia)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Sindicato dos Trabalhadores de Arqueologia - STARQ – is a nonpartisan union formed in 2012, in order to uphold the rights of
archaeology and heritage workers in Portugal.
STARQ bases its conduct on the the conviction that archaeological practise is not, and can never be, independent from social and
political contexts in which it is carried out. This is a professional sector which is characterized by a high degree of job instability in
the private sector and a lack of government funding in the public one. This is the result of the crippling austerity policies enforced
in the country during these last years. Even with the latest changes in government, state investment in Culture, a sector in which
the public management of cultural heritage is included, remains at extremely low levels.
The union in of itself has facilitated working conditions by not only maintaining dialogue between actors, but also through actions
in court. However, it is also essential to pursue initiatives that guarantee greater democratization of access to archaeological
goods by the population, other than their consumption as market goods. One of STARQ’s concerns is also the fight against the
“commodifying” of cultural heritage occurred in large urban centers and in rural areas all over the country.
In this sense, we intend to reflect upon how the very existence of a union and its action represent a space of resistance and social activism. How does the defense of heritage and its workers influence the way archaeological practices take place? How can
the interpretations that archaeologists make of their subject matter create a more ethical activity? In short, how can resistance
make archaeology more balanced in its relations and a more democratic and egalitarian activity?
