“SPERM-WHALE” AND ”CROZIER” - ORIENTATION AND CENTRALISMS IN EARLY NEOLITHIC BRITTANY,
4900 – 4000 BC
Author(s): Maeder, Stefan (Freiburger Institut für Paläowissenschaftliche Studien - FIPS)
Presentation Format: Oral
Based on archaeological, astronomical, and symbological evidence, results concerning two literally central motifs from Early
Neolithic ritual contexts are introduced. Both occur on central-capstones and supports in passage-graves, as well as on menhirs. Hitherto published archaeological interpretations of both motifs, the “sperm-whale” (fr. “cachalot”) and the “crozier” (fr.
“crosse”), represent significant progress, yet remain somewhat abstract and vague (Cassen, 2011; Whittle, 2000). The basic
astronomical phenomenon of the earth´s axial precession within ca. 25.800 years still goes largely unnoticed by archaeology.
“With respect to spatial orientation, navigation, chronometry and underlying aspects of funerary culture, the apparent and
changing centre of the cosmos, i.e. the Northern Celestial Pole (NCP), and conspicuous circumpolar constellations played a significant role in prehistoric Europe.”
Since 2009 this working hypothesis proved valid in a variety of instances between Japan and Ireland. Corresponding principles
are not only supported by evidence from early civilisations in Eastern Asia and the Middle East, but also from ancient Greece
and Rome (Maeder, 2011). Applying Stellarium software to reconstruct ancient skyscapes allows for a determination why the
seemingly disparate motifs of an abstracted “whale” and a “crozier” occur in combination regularly. In 2017 closely matching constellations of the “sperm-whale and the crozier“ were identified as concrete and still easily verifiable pole-finders during the Early
Neolithic in Brittany. These not only provide a detailed explanation for accepted regularities concerning megalithic funerary and
ritual monuments, but further elaborate most recently published results in support of a “maritime diffusion model for megaliths
in Europe” (Paulsson, 2019). Figuratively appearing at the interface between Mesolithic and Neolithic ways of life, the combined
occurrence of a marine mammal – supposedly indigenous - with an apparent pastoral tool/weapon – apparently imported – in
Brittany holds further clues towards a more accurate evaluation of an early European “hard rock phenomenon”.
