AXE IN THE IRON AGE CHILD BURIALS (7TH -12TH CENTURY AD) IN THE TERRITORY OF LATVIA: GENDER, SEX OR STATUS
Author(s): Erkske, Aija - Vilcāne, Antonija - Pētersone - Gordina, Elīna (Institute of Latvian History at the University of Latvia) Kazarina, Alisa - Ķimsis, Jānis - Ranka, Renāte (Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center) - Gerhards, Guntis (Institute of Latvian History at the University of Latvia)
Presentation Format: Poster
Axe was used both as a tool and a weapon in Iron Age Latvia, and it had a particular role in burial traditions. It has mainly been found
in male burials, and very rarely in female burials. Although axe is usually associated with adult burials, it has sometimes been
found in burials of children of different age groups. This particularly applies to axes with shafts wound with ornamented bronze
bands. In literature, graves furnished with these axes have been interpreted as rich warrior burials, but the same type of axes
have also been found in a juvenile (3-4 years old) and an adolescent (10-12 years old) burial. The axes found in these child burials
did not differ in size or shape from those found in adult burials. It is not entirely clear what factors were behind placing this kind
of axe in child burials, and whether gender, sex and status were among them.
This research has applied an innovative approach in studying burial traditions, using biomolecular (DNA) and biochemical (isotope) methods alongside archaeological and bioarchaeological methods. In this study, ancient DNA was used to establish biological sex and kinship, and stable isotope analysis was used to observe differences in diet between individuals of various age
categories and with different grave furnishings.
The results of this research provide new information about approaches to gender identity and social status in Iron Age Latvia
through burial traditions and help to interpret the role of children in prehistoric populations.
This research was a part of the Latvian Council of Science project No lzp-2018/1-0395.
