PETRIFICATION FOR REPRESENTATION: CASTLE BUILDING IN THE ALSATIAN VOSGES MOUNTAINS (AD
900-1300)
Author(s): Koch, Jacky (Archeologie Alsace) - Mechling, Jean-michel (Institut Jean Lamour – Université de Lorraine – UMR
7198 Dpt CP2S, Equope « Matériaux pour le Génie Civil », Nancy)
Presentation Format: Oral
“It is said that around the year 1200 ... There were only few forts and castles ... There was rarely used, for their construction,
stones of any price ...” (Chronicle of Dominicans of Colmar - 1300). From the end of the Hungarian invasions in the second third
of the 10th century until 1300, on the east side of the Vosges Mountains dozens of castles were constructed. Their plans and
shapes were very diverse. Mostly placed on summits and visible from the Rhine plain, these buildings combined the functions of
private residence with public protection. Their walls were designed to meet this dual need. This profusion is explained by a complex historical context and furthermore it benefited from the availability of a wide range of local geological resources. The direct
extraction on site or nearby gives stone a major role in aesthetic aspects as well as in the way it was used. As an “old” mountain
massif, the Vosges offered many different types of rock that permitted to shape all kinds of blocks, from rubble stone to big
ashlars. This technical advantage allowed for many design variations. Around AD 1200, political and social fragmentation leads
to a further densification of the building sites. It created economic competition between two types of monumental architecture:
firstly the use of rusticated masonry (named “blocs à bossage” resp. ”Buckelquader”) as a specialty of the stonecutters, and
secondly the use of rubble stones and mortar with new technics that made masons indispensable. This second type of construction necessitated to understand how to interlock different stone layers by binders and can be observed on residences of
ministeriales as well as at royal fortresses. Recent researches on this theme confronted field and geological data, especially by
studying of binding agents.
