THE INVASION OF CELTS IN DARDANIA, THE DATA OF ANCIENT AUTHORS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL
FINDS (THE CASE OF CËRNICA)
Author(s): Baraliu, Sedat (Faculty of Education; Faculty of Philosophy-Department of Anthropology) - Alaj, Premtim (Archaeological Institute of Kosovo)
Presentation Format: Poster
One of the most important events in the history of the Dardan kingdom was undoubtedly the invasion of the Celts. It should be
noted that archaeological records are very poor on the Celtic invasion in the territory of Dardania. The first evidence recorded of this invasion is from ancient authors. Appianus, Justinus, Livius, Diodorus, Polybius, Pausania, who wrote about the Celt
invasion of Dardania. The study in question is more about the invasion of 280 BC, when the Celt army were divided into three
parts. In this study, we will only treat the part of the Celtic army, which under the leadership of Bolgios attacked Macedonia and
Ilyria. During this march, following the defeat of Macedonia under the leadership of Ptolemy Ceraun, the Celts army crossed the
territory of Dardania, at which point destroyed some Dardanian settlements. For this invasion, archaeological data is scarce,
as the Dardanian territory is explored very little. But during 2016-2018, under the leadership of the Archaeological Institute
of Kosovo, excavations were carried out at the Iron age settlement of Cërnica (Gjilan, Kosovo). This excavation has provided us
with some important data that can testify the Celtic Invasion of Dardania. During the excavations, an archaeological layer was
discovered which proves that the settlement was destroyed. This layer coincides in the archaeological context with the Invasion
of the Celts. This is also confirmed by some archaeological findings that have Celtic origin. It is also worth mentioning that the
settlement of Cërnica is close to the Macedonian border and is located near the Binça river,which is a branch of Morava river. It is
assumed that the Celts followed exactly the flow of the Vardar and Morava streams to penetrate inside Illyria.
