TRACING THE LONG-TERM DEVELOPMENT OF THE MEDIEVAL RURAL LANDSCAPE AT THE NATIONAL
TRUST’S WALLINGTON ESTATE (NORTHUMBERLAND, UK)
Author(s): Vervust, Soetkin (Newcastle University; Vrije Universiteit Brussel) - Kinnaird, Tim (University of St Andrews)
Presentation Format: Oral
The 5250 ha rural Wallington estate has been a National Trust property since 1958. Apart from a late 17th century country house
within wooded pleasure grounds, almost all of the estate is agricultural land, divided into 15 separate farm holdings. The Wallington landscape we see today has been heavily shaped by estate management in the 18th and 19th centuries. The settlement
pattern is one of dispersed farmsteads, while the field systems largely reflect the orderly rectilinear layout of planned enclosure,
with small rectangular fields divided up by long and straight stone-faced banks. Yet, in medieval and early modern times the outlook of the landscape is believed to have been markedly different, with nucleated villages amidst more irregularly shaped open
fields which were farmed collectively.
This pattern of long-term landscape change, from open to more enclosed field systems, has been inferred across the whole
of Northumberland. It is however very difficult to gain a more detailed understanding of this process, because the origins and
development of historic earthwork boundaries and remnants of arable farming are often poorly understood as absolute dating
evidence is generally lacking.
To establish a more robust chronology, the project presented here used OSL profiling and dating. Based on a retrogressive landscape analysis of documentary evidence, archaeological data, aerial photographs and cartographic materials for the estate, five
areas were selected for further archaeological investigations and OSL sampling. This data was incorporated in a multi-temporal
historical GIS to provide more detailed spatial and temporal models of land management and settlement in and around Wallington, from land re-organisation at the end of the 16th century, through early land use in the 11th century. Moreover, at one site,
one prominent boundary tantalizingly dates to the 5th to 6th centuries, suggesting that post-medieval land divisions sometimes
trace much earlier land ownership rights.
