LIKE, COPY AND SHARE: THE SOCIAL NETWORKS OF 6,200 BC ALPINE MEDITERRANEAN
Author(s): Jerbic, Katarina (Flinders University, Adelaide)
Presentation Format: Poster
This poster shows some of the results from an interdisciplinary PhD research which focused of the climatic and socio-economic
changes that occurred on the submerged prehistoric site in Zambratija Bay, Croatia. Zambratija Bay is located on the Istria Peninsula, approaching the very end of the Adriatic and the Gulf of Trieste. Preliminary underwater archaeological investigations
revealed a unique case of a prehistoric pile-dwelling, originally placed near a freshwater environment, today submerged three
metres under the Adriatic Sea. According to the archaeological evidence and one initial radiocarbon date, human activity in the
settlement occurred sometime between the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age. The settlement was built on the outer edges
of a karstic sinkhole, and the preserved wooden piles indicated an architectural resemblance to the contemporary prehistoric
building tradition around the Alpine glacier lakes. The material culture, however, suggested that the settlement was a part of the
Eastern Adriatic prehistoric cultural complexes. In 2017, as part of a PhD research, a series of interdisciplinary fieldwork activities were undertaken at the site, which resulted in seven seabed sediment cores and 20 waterlogged wood samples, taken with
the aim to test the submerged Late Neolithic/Early Bronze Age pile-dwelling hypothesis. However, this study was also considering broader topics related to chronology, cultural migrations and occupational patterns in regional archaeology with an effort to
enhance and connect the known prehistoric archaeological and environmental records. The multiple cultural and environmental
actors and relationships between Zambratija and the contemporary settlers of the Alpine pile-dwellings on the north, and makers
of the Eastern Adriatic Nakovana-style pottery on the south, made the site a suitable candidate for recreating a social network
analysis. The analysis was based on the accessibility of well-defined categorical limitations such as time, space and material
culture, as well as cultural relations.
