WHERE DO THE CHILDREN GO? FUNERARY TREATMENTS OF JUVENILES WITHIN COLLECTIVE BURIAL
SITES IN NEOLITHIC SOUTHERN FRANCE
Author(s): Le Roy, Melie (Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LAMPEA, LabexMed)
Presentation Format: Oral
Collective burials are funerary deposits that accumulate over time with the regular or sequential addition of corpses. This phenomenon firstly took place in the European Atlantic coast around the middle Neolithic (4900-3500 BC) then it spread itself
further in Europe towards the end of the Neolithic and during the beginning of the Bronze Age (3500-2000 BC). Some types of
tombs (e.g. megalithic tombs) necessitated a huge investment of time and labor. According to ethnographic studies, these monumental tombs are generally built and managed either by a clanic or lineage group (if it has enough members), or in collaboration
with neighbouring tribes. We can hence ponder over who was buried inside these tombs, since some archaeological studies
indicate that a specific burial practice may sometimes be restricted to certain members of the population. Indeed, ethnography
highlights that access to some tombs may be structured by variables such as kinship, social status, etc. In this presentation, we
will focus on the variable of age, which is often a cause for exclusion or segregation within the burial.
While existing studies that synthesise data from these monuments have paid a lot of attention to form and function, there has
been less consideration of the nuanced differences noted in the deposition of human remains at these sites. Based on the methodology of the study of a collective burial site in Northern France, La Truie Pendue (Passy and Veron), a project was undertaken
on several similar burials from the south of France. Burial sites were studied in order to define the population buried inside, be
they caves or megalithic monuments, along with the study of the logic of the body deposition within the structure. Indeed, these
studies often reveals special treatments (localisation, position, etc.) towards the youngest suggesting a different social status
depending on the age-at-death.
