RESULT OF CARRYING OR PUTTING INTO A SHEATH? NEW DATA CONCERNING TRACES RESULTING
FROM TRANSPORTATION, HAFTING AND SECURING OF FLINTS
Author(s): Osipowicz, Grzegorz - Orłowska, Justyna (Nicolaus Copernicus University/ Institute of Archaeology)
Presentation Format: Oral
Microscopic research on the characteristics of use-wear traces forming on flint artefacts as a result of their use is one of the
basic objectives of the traceological analysis. For some time, the attention of researchers has been attracted not only by the
wear traces visible at the working edges of tools, but also the ones visible in their other parts. These traces can be the result of
the tool’s contact with the haft, its transportation in containers or, for example inserting them into the sheaths.
In our presentation we present results of experimental and traceological studies aiming to clarify the characteristics of the mentioned type of wear traces. The conducted experiments consisted of three stages. The first was based on carrying on the flint
products in organic containers made of hide, wood and bone by the time of several months. The second stage of work was aimed
at replicating as many types of hafting traces as possible. For this purpose, a series of experiments involving a varied use of flint
tools, hafted in a different kinds of organic raw materials, were carried out. The third stage of our work consisted in a long-term
insertion and removal of flint tools to/from sheaths made of hide, wood and bone.
The performed experimental work led to the creation of a very varied group of wear traces, the characteristics of which in some
cases deviate from the accepted standards, in others, to a large extent, supplement the current knowledge. Experimental work
was verified during a comparative analysis of the Mesolithic flint collections from sites in Paliwodzizna 29 and Ludowice 6 in
central Poland.
The work was funded by the scientific project from the National Science Center (NCN) in Cracow (Poland) no. 2016/23/B/
HS3/00689.
