THE UK TREASURE ACT REVIEW: MONETARY VALUATION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL ARTEFACTS
Author(s): Godfrey, Evelyne (Uffington Heritage Watch)
Presentation Format: Oral
The UK Government’s Department for Digital, Culture, Media, and Sport (DCMS) held a public consultation in early 2019, aimed
at widening the legal definition of “treasure” under the Treasure Act (1996). The law requires members of the public in England,
including metal detectorists, to report finds more than 300 years old & made of at least 10wt% gold or silver. If two or more gold
or silver coins are found together, they are classed as “treasure”. Finds of single gold or silver coins don’t require reporting. Ten
or more copper alloy coins found together are classed as “treasure”, as are finds of two or more base-metal objects dated to the
Iron Age or earlier. Apart from these examples, objects made of other materials aren’t compulsorily reported. “Preservation by
record” is sometimes achieved by suggesting members of the public voluntarily contact a regional Finds Liaison Officer to identify and record the non-treasure object before it is returned to the finder. Artefacts not classed as treasure can be legally sold
on the art market. “Treasure” artefacts are sent to a government-appointed committee that assesses the monetary value. The
finder and the owner of the land where the find was made are offered this amount, if it can be raised by a museum. In around 70%
of Treasure Act valuation cases in the last 20 years, no museum acquired the objects, leaving finders free to sell the antiquities.
The DCMS public announcement on Twitter of the current consultation read: “Do you enjoy looking for, preserving, or admiring
buried treasure? We want to hear from YOU...”. This paper will review proposed changes to the Treasure code, and wider concepts
of “preservation by record”, private ownership, and financially-based ‘value’ and ‘significance’, that prevail in England, despite the
UK’s ratification of the Valletta Convention in 2001.
