A SIGN OF MOBILITY AND CULTURAL EXCHANGE? CERAMICS WITH SCRIBBLE LINES AND
IMPRESSIONS ORNAMENTATION FROM THE LYSA HORA CEMETERY (UKR)
Author(s): Andriiovych, Marta - Hafner, Albert (University of Bern, Institute of Archaeological Sciences, Prehistory) - Shydlovskyi, Pavlo (Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Faculty of History, Department of Archeology and Museology)
Presentation Format: Oral
At the Lysa Hora cemetery, 50 graves with nearly 80 vessels were discovered. It belongs to the IIB period of the so-called
Azov-Dnieper culture, dated near 5200—4750 years BCE. For the Dnieper-Donetsk region, three types of ornamentation on
ceramics were common: comb prints, impressions, and scribbled lines. In the first period, typical ornaments are comb prints and
scribbled lines, in the second-period triangular impression. In my view, the observable differences in the vessels’ ornamentation,
as well as differing admixtures in the clay could be explained by two hypotheses:
1. The migration (permanent residential mobility) of social groups to the Dnieper-Donetsk region.
2. Phenomena of exchange beyond the Dnieper-Donetsk region between different social groups having different pottery production practices.
Comb ornamentation was most common in Ukrainian Neolithic. But in the second period, impressions became the most popular
ornamentation, whereas the linear ornamentation almost disappeared.
If the comb ornamentation was created in the Middle part of Dnieper river or spread with three different waves of the sea migration of social groups making the Cardium pottery style, and another influence came from groups, who made ceramic with
triangular impressions, we can suppose that scribbled linear ornamentations could be a local invention within the Bug-Dniester
pottery style in the Early Neolithic.
Questions remain: Are combinations of different types of ornamentation the result of an exchange between culturally different
groups and/or phases of adaptation and integration for the newcomers? And in both cases, what could this tell us about mobility,
cultural exchange social organization in the Neolithic in the Middle Dnieper region?
