CONSIDERATIONS ON THE MANAGEMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE IN WORLD HERITAGE
CITIES: CONVERGENCES OR DIVERGENCES?
Author(s): Pérez, Elena - Ferrer Román, Esther (Universidad Europea de Canarias) - Castillo Mena, Alicia (Universidad Complutense de Madrid)
Presentation Format: Oral
There is a strong debate on the management of the cultural heritage of World Heritage sites. This debate focuses in particular on
exceptional universal values and how these values -not always universal in nature- are interpreted and integrated into the current
societies that form to these cities and world heritage sites. At the recent World Heritage Best Practices Congress (Menorca,
2018), we presented a project named Parallel Cities developed in 9 world heritage cities. We identified that managing the multiple dimensions of a world heritage site shows divided reality. It enhanced by the tourist activity that has become a strong
protagonist in these cities. For this reason and as a result of the reflections shared at that congress, we present this work in
order to continue to deepen the management of these cities, in particular on the actions that institutions such as ICOMOS have
generated with their declarations. The design of these cities has been carried out in an exhaustive way, with a strong incidence in
the planning and commercialization that determine the generation of the concept of postmetrópoli. These expansive networks
of multiple but homogeneous centers that have been generated end up annulling the urban complexity of previous centuries in
order to homogenize the urban landscape of many of these cities. The result is a historic city distorted under the slogan of the
traditional, which tries to contain the memory of the past in an indefinite state of museum character and places for leisure; it
eradicates its main characteristic, the imagination and with it the desirable places of the city. We will analyse the city of San
Cristóbal de La Laguna (Canary Islands, Spain) as the main example. We hope to be able to help design follow-up actions for these
international organizations on the concept of cultural heritage management.
