FROM CREMATION TO INHUMATION: THE (RE)CHRISTIANIZATION OF FORMER TERRITORY OF ROMAN
DACIA PROVINCE (6TH TO 10TH CENTURY)
Author(s): Tiplic, Ioan Marian (Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu)
Presentation Format: Oral
For the chronological horizon from the 6th to the 10th centuries, there are only few approaches and most of them are dealing
with the typological analysis. Nothing can be said about what the funeral ritual meant for the horizon of the incineration or the
burial necropolis. A series of questions require different approaches to the historical cultural tradition of the Romanian archeological school: biritualism is or not a regional form of transition from Paganism to Christianity? Is there a difference between
the religious ceremony for the two rites: incineration and inhumation? Since can we definitely identify the existence of Christian
funeral practices in communities in the Transylvanian Carpathian Basin or in the North Danubian territories?
The problem avoided by most researchers in the Central European area is precisely the reconstruction of funerary practices
before the 9th century, based on the few written information and the multitude of funerary archaeological finds.
The analysis of 10th-century funerary practices throughout Central and Eastern Europe reveals a generalization of the Christian
funeral ritual and the appearance of large cemeteries around the churches. In the eastern part of the continent, where important
territories were not included within the sphere of influence of the Byzantine Empire or the Arpadian kingdom, a number of practices of pagan tradition have been maintained in the context of the penetration of Christianity. The inclusion of these territories
within a Christian state (Kievan Russia, the Arpadian kingdom or the Polish kingdom) has accelerated the process of passing the
population to Christianity under the impetus given by political authority. Regarding funeral rituals, archeology provides too little
data to begin an attempt to reconstruct it. It is not easy to propose reconstructions of ritual manifestations, whether pagan or
Christian, which accompanied the act of inhumation during the 6th-11th centuries.
