WOOD AND STONE: BUILDINGS IN THE LANDSCAPE OF THE SOUTHERN FRENCH ALPS SINCE THE END
OF THE PREHISTORIC PERIOD
Author(s): Shindo, Lisa (Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, CCJ, Aix-en-Provence; Aix Marseille Univ, Avignon Université, CNRS, IRD,
IMBE, Marseille) - Mocci, Florence (Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, CCJ, Aix-en-Provence) - Talon, Brigitte (Aix Marseille Univ, Avignon
Université, CNRS, IRD, IMBE, Marseille)
Presentation Format: Oral
Since almost 20 years, a French and British team is doing archaeological, dendrochronological and anthracological studies on
buildings in the Southern French Alps between 1200-2400 m. The aim is to gather information about traditional building practices and to specify long-term changes in the relationship between human societies and forest management.
In the higher altitudes, between 2070-2360 m, the appearance of stone-built structures and perishable materials is attested
from about 2500 BC - 400 AD by radiocarbon dating. Only the base of the walls, consisting of clusters of uncut and unbound shale
blocks is conserved (F. Mocci, K. Walsh). The material composition of walls and roof of the domestic space – probably constructed
in perishable materials – can be understood from anthracological analyses of burnt remains (European larch, stone pine, B. Talon).
On lower altitudes, between 1200-2060 m, we have studied timbers from about 100 archaeological sites (J.-L. Edouard, L. Shindo). The most important buildings are houses with stables for animals in the lower stone floor. The barn is often incorporated in
the house as upper floors, mostly made from wood. This lighter material allows to create many openings which helps with hay
drying. Several wood building methods were identified: trusses, ‘blockbau’, half-timbering, ceiling with joists, French ceilings.
These timbers are made from local species (Scots pine, European larch, fir, stone pine). Two major wood building phases were
identified: 10th-14th and 15th-20th centuries AD. The hiatus in the second half of the 14th century could be linked to the historical “disruptions” which had negative consequences on demography.
Stone as the more durable material was used at least for footings from the beginning. Likewise, European larch and stone pine
were employed throughout. Therefore, in this mountain area, building materials were utilized depending on local availability and
on their properties.
