TRIANGULATION, MIXING OR COMPLEMENTARY? (JUST KEEP IT SIMPLE, STUPID!)
Author(s): Axelsen, Irmelin (Museum of Cultural History University of Oslo)
Presentation Format: Oral
When I began developing my PhD project in the spring of 2016 it very early became clear that my somewhat broad purpose statement, mostly concerned with intangible phenomena, needed various methods and different types of material to be properly
explored and analysed. Initially I chose a threefold approach — a questionnaire, qualitative interviews and a distribution analysis
— and went with the term ‘triangulation’.
Little did I know about the many positivistic pitfalls associated with the approach. When looking for alternatives I discovered
Mixed Method Research (MMR), which seemed promising. Alas, all textbooks and articles described long lists of what to do, how
to do it, and in which order to do it. There seemed to be a strong belief that ‘noise’ in the data could be eradicated if only the study
design was strong enough.
I opted to keep looking. Fortunately, a level-headed professor, leading a beginners course in qualitative methods, came to my
rescue. She shrugged her shoulders at the conundrum many of the anxious PhD students felt they were facing when wading
through the methodological jungle, attempting to find a suitable match for their work, and said: ‘Why make it difficult? I just call
the use of two or more methods in a study complementary’.
There has, of course, been bigger challenges than choosing a term to describe the implementation of several methods for someone with a traditional archaeological education. How to get research participants? How and when to apply for permission to
conduct interviews at all? How to ensure reliability and validity between the various methods? So far, the pragmatic and no-nonsense mindset distilled upon me at the course at the Faculty of medicine has served me well. Arguably, the KISS principle, and
openness about all shortcomings, has a place in heritage research too.
