MASS FINDS FROM THE FORCED LABOUR CAMP TEMPELHOF, BERLIN: EXPLOITING NEW
POSSIBILITIES OF INTERPRETATION USING A RELATIONAL DATABASE
Author(s): Misterek, Kathrin - Stern, Judith (Freie Universtität Berlin)
Presentation Format: Oral
The access to large quantities of archaeological artefacts can often only be established using new methods of inventory.
Although mass finds make up the majority of the objects recovered on modern excavations, they seem inaccessible for further
examination due to their sheer volume and are therefore rarely included in studies. Their potential to provide useful information
has been little researched so far. This applies in particular to excavations dealing with contexts from the 20th century, the finds
from which pose new challenges to the excavators, not only because of their quantity but also because of their diversity.
The project ”Excavation of the Forced Labour Camps on the Tempelhof Airfield, Berlin: Digital Corpus, Analysis and Reconstruction of Living Conditions” examines finds and structures from the Nazi period when thousands of people were forced to build
aircraft for the German Luftwaffe. The artefacts consist of a modest number of unique objects and tens of thousands of mass
finds, including nails, fragments of glass and porcelain.
The aim of this talk is to present some solutions to the aforementioned challenges as applied within our project. The basis for our
evaluation is a specially programmed relational database, which facilitates a systematic recording of finds according to defined
categories and criteria. The excavation plan, information on excavated structures and other background data (such as images
and text sources) are also available in the database.
This combined approach opens up new possibilities of interpretation. At the same time, however, there is a risk that investigators
will become alienated from their objects of investigation: The tens of thousands of finds are primarily accessible as digital datasets, while the physical objects can no longer be accessed, due to their large number or because they cannot all be kept within
reach due to limited storage capacity.
