UNDERSTANDING AGRICULTURAL DYNAMICS DURING THE 5TH MIL BC IN CENTRAL EUROPE - A
CLOSER LOOK AT PERIPHERAL SETTLEMENT AREAS
Author(s): Scharl, Silviane (Institute of Prehistoric Archaeology, Cologne University) - Stobbe, Astrid (Institut für Archäologische Wissenschaften, University of Frankfurt a.M.) - Roepke, Astrid - Zerl, Tanja - Nolde, Nadine (Institute of Prehistoric
Archaeology, Cologne University) - Suhrbier, Stefan (Institute of Prehistoric Archaeology, Free University of Berlin)
Presentation Format: Oral
The advent of agriculture in Central Europe during the second half of the 6th mil. BC constitutes a fundamental change in prehistoric everyday life. However, our knowledge on Neolithic agriculture is somewhat sketchy. We have a quite detailed notion of
the earliest agriculture during LBK, that was particularly focused on fertile loess soils and can be characterized as small-scale
horticulture. In addition, during the last years, research has focused on the 4th mil. BC, when profound changes in agricultural
techniques occur in the archaeological record. In this context the use of fire (slash-and-burn), a growing significance of animal
husbandry or ploughing are discussed. More generally, processes of economic diversification and the colonization of previously
unsettled areas outside the loess areas (e.g. lakeshore settlements, northern lowlands) have been documented. These dynamic
developments are rooted in the 5th mil. BC that is, however, only poorly understood since research on agriculture of this period
(e.g. from Grossgartach-, SBK-, Roessen- or Bischheim contexts) is still rare in Central Europe.
A closer look at the archaeological record indicates, for example, a first expansion beyond the Central European loess zone during the middle of the 5th mil. BC (Roessen and Bischheim). This is accompanied by the use of new cereal types like naked barley
and tetraploid wheat. Moreover, the repeated use of peripheral space within already existing settlement areas (e.g. East Wetterau) and of the uplands (e.g. Vogelsberg, Eifel), possibly in the context of animal husbandry, has been documented. The paper aims
at identifying the starting point and understanding the causes and consequences of these developments based on an interdisciplinary view (e.g. settlement and landscape archaeology, macro-remain- and pollen-analysis, archaeozoology, geoarchaeology)
on the periphery of middle Neolithic settlement areas, where these dynamic developments become visible.
