“CARRYING THE BOAT BACK TO THE LAKE” – AN OPEN-AIR SHOWCASE FOR THE ELDEST LOGBOAT OF
SWITZERLAND
Author(s): Chevallier, Barbara (Archaeological Service of the Canton of Bern) - Yoshida, Maruchi (Kurecon)
Presentation Format: Oral
The discovery of the eldest known logboat in Switzerland (4’500 BC), during a rescue excavation on the lido of Moosseedorf
came as a positive surprise to the local community. While the archaeological site inventory testifies to an intense occupation
of the area in Mesolithic and Neolithic periods of high scientific value, the acute demand to expand the commercial hub is a welcome manna for the region. The authorities are often confronted with the conflicting interests of the protection of the historical
and natural heritage and those of the economic development. The project ”carrying the boat back to the lake” is born from the will
of the municipality to return to its citizens an original witness of their history and that of the archaeological service to promote
its activity and know-how.
What started as a simple wish to exhibit the dugout in an open-air showcase next to its find spot was a challenging venture. The
respect of the legal and financial framework regarding the protection of the environment and the use of public money, the technical feasibility to fulfill conservation require-ments in a freestanding showcase and finally the decision to endorse the project
were obstacles to overcome. Different cross-sectoral partners assessed together the risks and agreed upon the shar-ing of
responsibility for an unprecedented project. This endeavor required from each contributor to reach beyond his own domain of
expertise.
This project describes a journey full of unexpected adventures combining a high degree of technical and financial effort on a
small spot of 20 m². This contribution shows the necessity to create a dynamic and open project culture in order to bridge individual, economic, scientific and professional interests for an overall aim: preserving a cultural artifact and highlighting it as cultural
and technical achievement of mankind in the past and today.
