BUILDING HILLFORT: SOCIAL MEANING OF FORTIFIED SITES IN IRON AGE LATVIA
Author(s): Sne, Andris (University of Latvia)
Presentation Format: Oral
As distinctive component of past and present landscape, hillforts had raised permanent attention from both researchers and
public during the last centuries. In Latvia, hillforts of Late Iron Age (or ‘long Viking Age’) had become part of collective memory
that partly might be explained by their impressive outlook, especially fortifications. So, for example, they played prominent role in
public discourse and national propaganda in 1920s and 1930s symbolising glorious pre-Crusade past while also later they often
were viewed as centres of political power and seats of local petty-kings. The number of discovered hillforts in Latvia (close to
500 sites) is constantly increasing due to recent advances in surveying and usage of LIDAR data that allows identifying artificial
modifications even in deep forests and remote areas. Beginnings of hillforts in territory of present-day goes back to the Late
Bronze Age and Pre-Roman Iron Age but most of hillforts (more than half of them) were used in later prehistory. There are numerous hillforts with elaborate defence systems including several moats and earthen ramparts (up to five) and revealing intensive
cultural layer during archaeological research. Some of them have large adjacent settlements and their inhabitants were actively
involved in craft and trade activities, becoming similar to early towns. On the other hand, there are numerous sites with remains
of fortifications but without traces of long-term human inhabitation. Recent research in Iron Age Grobina Hillfort even allows
concluding that initially it was small peninsular settlement and only in following centuries it was remodelled as higher location of
fortified site. Therefore, these sites, which currently are labelled as hillforts, share their common feature – fortifications, while
their functions in Iron Age were much more diverse and different, and presumable most of them were used as non-settled sites,
like communal or refuge sites, military forts, households.
