THE USE OF JADE IN THE CARIBBEAN
Author(s): Knippenberg, Sebastiaan (Archol BV, Leiden, Netherlands; Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University) - Rodríguez
Ramos, Reniel (University of Puerto Rico, Utuado) - Schertl, Hans-Peter - Maresch, Walter (Institute of Geology, Mineralogy
and Geophysics, Ruhr-University Bochum) - Hertwig, Andreas (UCLA, Los Angeles) - García-Casco, Antonio (Department of
Mineralogy and Petrology, University of Granada; Andalusian Institute of Earth Sciences, CSIC-University of Granada; Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, American Museum of Natural History, New York) - Harlow, George (Department of Earth
and Planetary Sciences, American Museum of Natural History, New York) - López, Adolfo (Santo Domingo) - Hofman, Corinne
(Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University)
Presentation Format: Oral
The importance of jade in the Caribbean has long been acknowledged due the usage of the nephrite variety of jade for the manufacture of zoomorphic pendants. Since the early 2000’s in-depth petrographical, mineralogical and geo-chemical work on a
number of axes has shown that the jadeite variety of jade had also been used and much valued within this island archipelago.
Although we are still largely unaware of the exact provenance of nephrite in the region, the sourcing of jadeitite rock has seen
considerable progress during the past 15 years. Three source regions are of significance: the Rio San Juan region in northern
Dominican Republic, the Sierra del Convento in eastern Cuba, and the Motagua Fault Zone in Guatemala. Recent techno-typological study and in-depth analyses of artefacts, have demonstrated the complex nature of jadeitite characterization and the
difficulties with discriminating the three main localities.
Despite these difficulties in firmly pinpointing a source, the archaeological record of jadeitite use after AD 600 has provided
some patterns that favour the exploitation of the local Caribbean sources over the Guatemala one, although the latter cannot totally be ignored. The available data suggest that manufacture, distribution, and exchange of jadeitite tools occurred between ca.
AD 600 and 1500, and strongly coincides with Ceramic Age habitation on the Greater Antilles. Jadeitite axes became distributed
over considerable distances spanning the entire insular Caribbean. Its spread was facilitated by the already existing inter-island
exchange networks tying the communities on the islands. Archaeological finds show that jadeitite was not only valued as an
excellent tool material, but that it also fulfilled a role in a ritual realm. We therefore argue that the control over this jadeitite might
have played an important role in the socio-political competition between the different Greater Antilles chiefdoms that arose
during the Late Ceramic Age.
