CIRCULATING ARTEFACTS: A CROSS-PLATFORM ALLIANCE AGAINST THE LOOTING OF PHARAONIC
ANTIQUITIES
Author(s): Rindi, Carlo (Department of Ancient Egypt & Sudan, The British Museum)
Presentation Format: Oral
The archaeological legacy of ancient Egypt and Sudan is renowned for its outstanding preservation and is uniquely important for
the study of early civilisation. It is valued by both the global and local communities, inspires national pride, and is a key economic
resource through the tourist industry. However, increased levels of looting have caused great losses to archaeological sites,
museums and magazines. There are now more illicit artefacts on the international art market than ever before since the 1970
UNESCO treaty on cultural property. The problem is multifaceted and should be tackled from multiple directions.
Any attempt to fight the looting and trafficking of pharaonic antiquities must involve a concerted effort by the Egyptological
community to monitor the art market. Only greater vigilance by the experts will truly pressure dealers and collectors to meet
higher standards of ethics and transparency, thereby enabling more detections and repatriations of illicit artefacts. This need
is now being addressed in the Circulating Artefacts project, an initiative of the British Museum conducted in partnership with
the antiquities authorities of Egypt and Sudan. Thanks to a grant from the Cultural Protection Fund, which is run by the British
Council, we are equipped to develop an innovative online platform. This centres on a database of pharaonic antiquities seen in
the trade and in private collections. A valuable tool for collaborative work, it exposes dealers and collectors to closer scrutiny by
subject specialists and law enforcement agencies.
The online platform was launched in February 2019, enabling anyone to contribute new information to the database. This paper
provides an overview of the project’s objectives, its strategy, and its first results in counteracting the illicit antiquities trade
through the efforts of the project and its partners.
