IN SEARCH OF INVISIBLE BURIAL MOUNDS ON THE LANDS OF NORTH-EASTERN RUS’
Author(s): Krasnikova, Anna (State Historical Museum) - Erokhin, Sergey (Institute of Archaeology, Russian Academy of
Sciences) - Medvedev, Andrey (Institute of Geography, Russian Academy of Sciences) - Makarov, Nikolay (Institute of Archaeology, Russian Academy of Sciences) - Modin, Igor (Moscow State University) - Shorkunov, Ilia (Institute of Geography, Russian
Academy of Sciences) - Pelevin, Andrey (Moscow State University) - Ugulava, Nani - Milovanov, Sergey (Institute of Archaeology, Russian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
Suzdal Opolie, the central region of North-Eastern Rus’, is known as the territory where barrow cemeteries were widespread in
the Viking and Post-Viking period. However, recent field investigations and evaluation of the maps of medieval necropolises and
settlements have shown that the number of mounds is much smaller than the estimated population that could master this
space. Can we explain this disproportion by the fact that significant part of the necropolises were destroyed by long-term plowing and other anthropogenic interventions or remained undetected? Our task was to identify remains of leveled barrows, invisible
on the present surface at one of the strongly destroyed necropolises.
Several approaches were tested for the identification and mapping the necropolis’s structure: areal drone imaging, geophysical techniques and traditional archaeological methods. It turned out, that implied separately these methods are not effective
enough for the search of the structures. The reason is in the variety of natural conditions and anthropogenic processes masking
archaeological features, large volume and low speed of archaeological works. Therefore, the task is generally in the delimitation
(automatic or not) of the results of all those processes.
Two principles were developed to make investigations productive. The first is collecting maximum types of measurement data
possible within each survey level, regardless of their direct connection to archaeology. In remote sensing it is a multi-temporal
and thermal imaging, in geophysics-electrical and magnetic surveys. The set of different type data reflecting the target as well
as the masking structures makes the classification task much likely to be solved. In some areas the non-destructive surveys
results enabled to perform some archaeological spatial analysis tasks. The second principle is integration of excavation and
soil-survey results as training dataset for the interpretation other methods. The efficiency of this integration has substantive
influence on data interpretation.
