EMERGING NEW CULTURAL ENTITIES IN THE 7TH CENTURY BC SOUTH OF CARPATHIANS. FERIGILE
GROUP AND “THE WHITE GOLD”
Author(s): Mandescu, Dragos (Arges County Museum)
Presentation Format: Oral
The paper focuses on the sudden emergence of the cultural group Ferigile in the mid-7th c. BC, in a formerly blank area, where
there was nothing before during the Early Iron Age (southern sub-Carpathian hills of Oltenia and Muntenia - southern Romania).
The group’s settlements, fortresses and other forms of habitat are unknown, but the incineration necropolises debuts in the 7th
c. with rich and prestigious burials, with spectacular assemblages of adornments, weapons and harnesses belonging to some
previously less or un-known forms (except ceramics), highlighting complex links with other milieux from Balkans and Eastern
Europe. The best example is the eponymous necropolis at Ferigile composed by 150 barrows evolving for almost two and a half
centuries. In absentia of the habitat structures, the necropolis from Ferigile reflects the mirrored image of a true node of power in
the area. The emergence of Ferigile occurs on the background of the dissolution and vanishing of Basarabi cultural phenomenon.
The predilectional zone of expression, and even the landscape of the two cultures differ fundamentally and do not overlap, which
may imply the adoption of special economic patterns and the referencing to different cultural networks. The poor representation
of Ferigile settlements in the main spreading area, apparently in contrast to the large number of cemeteries, seems to suggest
some relatively mobile communities having an economy based on livestock farming but also on a new vision of valuing the natural
resources. So, not at all by accident, the most expressive monuments of Ferigile group (the elites’ graves) overlap some of the
most important salt deposits in the southern sub-Carpathians. The paper emphasizes the role played by Ferigile communities
dealing with these salt deposits (a resource that has been continuously exploited throughout all ages afterwards) and the newly-established communication and exchange networks.
