NEOLITHIC SILICEOUS TOOLS FROM LIMBA-OARDA DE JOS (ALBA COUNTY, ROMANIA): NEW
ARCHAEOMETRIC RESULTS
Author(s): Rey, Mar (Babes-Bolyai University. Department of Geology) - Ionescu, Corina (Babes-Bolyai University. Department
of Geology; Kazan Federal University. Archeotechnologies & Archeological Material Sciences Lab) - Ciutӑ, Marius-Mihai (Lucian Blaga University) - Muresan-Pop, Marieta - Simon, Viorica (Babeş-Bolyai University, Faculty of Physics, Interdisciplinary
Research Institute on Bio- Nano-Sciences) - Barbu-Tudoran, Lucian (Department of Biology, Babeş-Bolyai University Cluj-Napoca)
Presentation Format: Poster
Limba – Oarda de Jos (Alba County in Transylvania, Romania) is an archaeological site dated between 5,405 and 5,310 cal BC.
More than 20 years of active research have endowed it as a key-site in understanding the complexity of the Neolithic processes
from this part of the Intra-Carpathian area. The extensive collection of archaeological artefacts is actually stored at the ‘Ion Raica’ Municipal Museum in Sebeș. The lithic industry is dated in early Vinča culture period (Vinča A and Vinča B1) and was knapped
from different kind of stones.
The present archaeometric study regards a set of lithic industry set consisting of 322 siliceous pieces (tools and débitage) from
which 20 pieces have been analysed by polarized light optical microscopy (OM), 22 by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
(FTIR) and 28 pieces by cold field emission scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(CFE-SEM-EDX). The aim of the study is to characterize and classify the objects based on compositional and microstructural
features, and finally to infer the provenance of the raw materials. Several petrographic types have been discriminated, including:
a) radiolarites, b) cherts, c) fossiliferous cherts and d) siliceous limestones.
All samples analysed show FTIR bands which can be assigned to Si-O vibrations in quartz. The samples made of fossiliferous
chert and siliceous limestones have an additional wide band produced by carbonates. CE-SEM-EDX shows specific microtextural
