THE SHAPE OF MOUNTAINS: SETTLEMENT AND CIRCULATION IN NW ARGENTINA AT THE ONSET OF
SEDENTARY LIFEWAYS (CA. 1500 BC-AD600)
Author(s): Lazzari, Marisa (University of Exeter) - Korstanje, Maria (Instituto de Arqueologia y Museo, Universidad Nacional de
Tucuman, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientificas y Tecnicas - CONICET)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Andean region provides a unique record of human habitation in high-altitude areas. Although camelid-assisted mobility gradually developed over the long term, these practices were very different from the mobile lifeways observed in other high-altitude
settings in the world. In the south-central Andes, archaeology and cognate disciplines have proposed a variety of settlement
and mobility models, emphasizing the increasing role of llama caravans as the connective agents across its starkly diverse landscape. The Formative period (ca 1500 BC-AD600) in NW Argentina (NWA) is of interest as a time when new technologies and
forms of settlement emerged, based on access to the exploitation of diverse microenvironments. Combining sedentism with
varying degrees of residential mobility, these communities built upon the legacy of long-distance movements of the earlier hunter-gatherers and created a new social landscape. Fueled by their increased productive capacities and their ability to maintain
social bonds through exchanged materials, these new practices shaped the topography of this mountainous area in unprecedented ways.
Traditional approaches have proposed the increasing centralization of interaction through the ability of some areas of NWA to
control agricultural surplus, craft production and regional traffic. Based on typological similarities and vague assumptions on
agricultural practices, these interpretations have left much to speculation. Focusing on key sites in the El Bolsón Valley and the
southern Calchaquí valleys area of NWA, we discuss archaeometry, artifact analysis, paleoecology, and environmental evidence
to provide a multi-scalar view of community production and reproduction, thereby offering an alternative approach to this period
in the region. Formative period communities were highly creative, generating enough resources to support both internal and regional networks of cooperation and alliance, and to circumvent or even undermine those that sought to concentrate power and
resources. Our approach offers a comparative, nuanced perspective to high-altitude lifeways worldwide.
