CORDED WARE CULTURE FROM SOUTH-EASTERN POLAND IN THE LIGHT OF ISOTOPIC ANALYSIS
Author(s): Szczepanek, Anita (Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Centre for Mountains
and Uplands Archaeology, Cracow; Department of Anatomy, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Cracow) - Jarosz, Paweł
(Institute of Archaeology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań) - Włodarczak, Piotr (Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Centre for Mountains and Uplands Archaeology, Cracow)
Presentation Format: Oral
The aim of our study is to present the result of stable isotopes analysis of the Final Neolithic communities of the Corded Ware
culture from south-eastern Poland. Conducted investigations enabled for the diet reconstruction and tracing variability in the
nutrition preferences within and between territorial groups.
We analysed samples of human and animal bones. Extracted collagen was firstly dated and then stable isotopic composition was
determined using a Thermo Flash EA 1112HT elemental analyzer connected to a Thermo Delta V Advantage isotope ratio mass
spectrometer in a Continuous Flow system.
Generally there were no significant sex differences in dietary intakes but a group of male individuals with higher δ15N values is
noticeable. Signatures of human δ13C ranged around –20‰ so they are typical for humans living in inland temperate environments and having a terrestrial diet based on C3-plant and animal resources. The δ15N values are from about 10 to 11.4‰ and
they are comparable with contemporary populations from the central Europe. The offset of +3–4‰ in human δ15N values in
comparison to herbivores and the omnivore animals corresponds to a difference of one trophic level. Acquired results of stable
isotope analysis are consistent with models of subsistent strategies of the Corded Ware culture communities based on archaeological sources.
The project is currently realized (National Science Centre, Poland, NCN 2015/19/B/HS3/02149 and 2016/20/S/HS3/00307).
