HEALTH CARE AND PARACAS CRANIAL TREPANATION IN CABEZAS LARGAS, SOUTH COAST OF PERU
(400 – 100 BC)
Author(s): Lévy Contreras, Jessica (Independent researcher) - Kolp-Godoy, Maria (University of Zurich) - Watson Jiménez,
Lucía (Universidad Científica del Sur) - Fernández Valdivia, Ana (Centro de Investigaciones en Antropología Biológica y Genética)
Presentation Format: Oral
For over a century archaeologists have used teeth to address health in past populations. Today, the microscopic analysis of
dental residues like calculus and cariogenic sediment makes it possible to explore medical attendance in past societies. This
research seeks to evaluate from a dental anthropological approach, healthcare on individuals where cranial surgeries (trepanations) were performed.
A small sample (n = 5) composed by female and male adults is considered in this study. Three of them with clear signs of cranial
trepanation, and two of them still have hair and a cotton wrapping on their head, where the possibility of a trepanation cannot be
ruled out. All individuals come from a Paracas tomb related to the end of the Early Horizon (400 – 100 BC). This burial of unprecedented character was excavated by Engel in the end of the 50s at the Cabezas Largas site, located on the south coast of Peru.
Once the cariogenic and tooth-wear conditions were analyzed, a microscopic analysis of dental calculus and cariogenic sediment was conducted to detect phytoliths and starch grains, and also the consumption of medicinal plants that could show the
care given to surgically operated individuals in the past. In micro-rests of cariogenic cavity and dental calculus of four individuals,
the remains of phytoliths and starches were identified. Apparently, the individuals consumed a rich diet of well-processed and
cooked starches. Phytoliths identified included panicoid, trichoma, bambusoide, epidermal and parenchyma, which suggests
the consumption of medicinal plants of Andean vernacular use, particularly those from the Asteraceae family. Additionally, the
finding of sponge spicules and diatoms indicates the consumption of algae perhaps with medicinal purposes. The individuals
who received surgical intervention consumed a diet rich in starches and medicinal plants, which suggests other people’s care
for the individual’s recovery.
