MONUMENTS, FOLKLORE AND POLITICS: NOTES FROM A SMALL ISLAND ARCHIPELAGO
Author(s): Vella Gregory, Isabelle (University of Cambridge)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Maltese Islands never quite fit within an established paradigm. How does one tell the story of this archipelago? First, there
are giants, whose impact goes beyond folklore. Second is a diffusionist paradigm that views people as passive receptors. Third,
the emerging multi-strand narrative changed thinking in some areas but not made significant inroads in others. In particular,
there remains reluctance towards a critical assessment of politics. The narrative and research are shaped by colonial and racial
politics and an unresolved post-colonial period.
Tales of giants have led to an enduring focus on big stones, an idea that continues to underpin the tourism market. The folklore
has not been studied in relation to archaeology, with the exception of Fr Magri’s early in the 20th century, who sought to establish
a Phoenician origin for the Maltese. Following the opening of the Suez canal, discourse shifted towards linking the islands with
the African continent. This formed part of a wider Empire debate on the status of ‘natives’, with a focus on studying past and
present skulls, attributing the Maltese to a “Mediterranean” race. These arguments need to be seen in tandem with the Islands’
struggle for identity and political future, in particular an overarching Latin-Catholic identity, the Language Question (whether
English or Italian should be the official language and the struggle for the recognition of the Maltese language) and the road towards self-government (granted in 1921 and revoked shortly thereafter). Post-Independence (1964) political turmoil led to the
Faculty of Arts’ removal from University. By the time it was re-established, archaeologists had to find new ways of approaching
questions. There followed a time of intense work from the Italian and Anglo-Saxon traditions. Lingering old paradigms and approaches often collided. In the present, heritage is facing increased threats that are affecting research.
