FUTURE STAGES FOR MUSEUM OBJECTS: THE CASE OF TALLINN CITY MUSEUM
Author(s): Tint, Küllike (Tallinn City Museum) - Tuominen, Suvi (University of Helsinki)
Presentation Format: Oral
The paper discusses a case study where current theories on performance in museum contexts are combined with an event taking place in Tallinn City Museum. Tallinn City Museum preserves and exhibits archaeological materials found in the city of Tallinn
from the stone age until the present day. Most of the time the objects are represented in a traditional manner, where a wall of
glass is dividing the space and air between the public and the objects. Such form of representation, naturally, cuts the possibility
for the museum visitor to sense the multitemporal and ambiguous nature of the archaeological objects. The glass wall distances
the visitor from the archaeological objects and at the same time manifests the ownership of the objects. However, due to the
risk of possible damage to the fragile objects, it is also necessary for the museums conservation purposes to protect these
materials.
Our case study focused on conceptualising the liminal space between the preservation of museum objects and the engagement of the public. Through methodologies native to live art and various performative practices, we released the objects from
their glass cabinets and re-created a different kind of public stage for the objects. Performance artists, lights, scenographic
compositions and various other choreographic entities, such as the archaeological objects themselves, assemble a space that
brings these archaeological materials physically closer to the visitors yet prevents possible damage to the objects. The performance space transforms into an invisible glass wall that allows the public to connect with the objects through intensive sensory
experience without touching. The emergent ‘kinesphere’, as well as the bodies of the professional performers, convey various
meanings and interpretations of the objects.
