EASTERN TRANSYLVANIA DURING THE LATE ROMAN PERIOD: IDENTITIES, INTERACTION AND
INTEGRATION INTERPRETED THROUGH THE FUNERARY DISCOVERIES
Author(s): Popa, Alexandru (National Museum of Eastern Carpathians, Sf. Gheorghe)
Presentation Format: Oral
My presentation focuses on the Late Roman graves from the eastern part of Transylvania. I want to analyse the changes in the
funerary practices after the Roman abandon of the Province Dacia until the disappearance of the Sântana de Mureș-Černjachov
culture (SMCC). Even from the beginning, we must underline that the Late Roman Period in the eastern part of Transylvania represents only the beginning of a historic period. Thus, the concept of archaeological cultures, with all its methodological gaps, remains the basic instrument for contemplating the distribution in time and space of the archaeological artefacts and complexes.
The results of the archaeological excavations conducted in the past 10-15 years and those of the field prospections lately conducted in the eastern part of Transylvania still question the issue of cultural individuality of this region. From a spatial point of
view the research area represents - according to Brather’s definition - an „identity micro-region” (BRATHER 2014, 25-27). Such
well delimited geographic spaces are also known as “key regions” (“Schlüsselgebiet”) (ZIMMERMANN u. a. 2004, 49-50). This level of geographical and social space grouping offers us the possibility to study the structures of economic, social and settlement
topography within the protohistoric human communities (MEIER 2009).
In my presentation I will insist on two major issues that the research of this epoch faces. First, I will stop my attention upon a distinct cultural group in the eastern part of Transylvania, different of other groups belonging to the SMCC (“Sf. Gheorghe Culture”).
Then I will approach the so-called belated occupation (“verzögerte Landnahme”) of the territories of the former roman province
Dacia by the bearers of the SMCC culture.
