BEYOND THE PARADIGMS: ARCHAEOASTRONOMY AS A NEW INTERPRETATION KEY TO UNDERSTAND
THE FUNCTION AND MEANING OF ANCIENT BUILDINGS
Author(s): De Franceschini, Marina (Progetto Accademia)
Presentation Format: Poster
Archaeoastronomy can give an important contribution to Archaeology for a better understanding of the function and meaning
of some ancient Roman buildings. I have a first-hand direct experience in Roman archeology, and I can say that Archeoastronomy
significantly helped me in questioning or revising old paradigms in Archeology. It gave me a new interpretation key to evaluate
data in a different way, and to formulate innovative theories; I will present some case studies to prove it.
Archaeoastronomy is a multidisciplinary science summing up ‘scientific’ and ‘humanistic‘ aspects. The ‘scientific’ part is up to
astronomers or astrophysicists, who make calculations with algorithms to reconstruct the position of the Sun, of the Moon and
other celestial bodies in a given historical period. They also ascertain whether the luminous phenomena (hierophanies) that we
still see today also occurred in ancient times, and on what date.
On the other hand, the ‘humanistic’ part is up to archaeologists and historians, who study the ancient buildings, their construction techniques and their date, to verify if the structures that produce hierophanies still are the original ones. They also study the
ancient sources and religious cults to understand the function of those buildings, and their symbolic meaning linked to the date
identified by the astronomers. A final result that can only be achieved by working together.
This conference gives us the opportunity to discuss and define the sometimes controversial relationship between ‘scientific’
and ‘humanistic’ disciplines: the latter too often are underestimated or looked-at with raised eyebrows, as if they could not have
the ‘scientific’ approach that indeed they have.
We must overcome this separation and mistrust, because mathematical calculations alone or archaeological records alone are
not enough. To improve knowledge and make innovative and original discoveries, Astronomers and Archaeologists must work
together with equal dignity and mutual trust.
