BLIND TESTING: AN EVALUATION OF PLANT FIBRE DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES
Author(s): Waudby, Denis - Thompson, Gillian - Evans, Adrian (University of Bradford)
Presentation Format: Oral
A range of natural fibres is likely to have been used in prehistoric material culture across northern Europe. Consequently, understanding the fibres used under specific circumstances contributes to archaeological interpretation of sites and societies.
Techniques from material science are applied to fragmentary, degraded archaeological samples, e.g. fibre morphology is conventionally used by textile specialists to identify archaeological bast fibres. Here, two aspects (1) microfibrillar angle (MFA) and (2)
cross-sectional circularity (Ct) are evaluated in terms of their reliability for distinguishing between nettle (Urtica dioica L.), flax
(Linum usitatissimum L.) and hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). We present results from controlled blind testing of randomly selected
samples of minimally processed fibres (16 examples of each species). For each sample, the MFA and Ct were recorded, a diagnosis attributed then the identification compared against the known identity. The success rates for identification were compared,
using MFS and Ct individually and in combination. Initial results showed differences in terms of the success rates in identifying
the three fibres, and that the reliability of the two techniques varied. When the MFA was used alone in the blind tests, hemp was
successfully identified in 81% of cases, 50% of the nettle fibres were identified correctly and only 31% of the flax. When Ct
was used alone, flax was most reliably identified (75% of the samples), followed by nettle (38%) and hemp (25%). Using the two
methods together generated the highest rates of correct identification: hemp 81%, flax 63% and nettle 63%. For the 48 samples overall, the success rate using the identification criteria together was 69%. It can be concluded then, that it is important to
take both MFA and Ct into consideration when diagnosing unidentified material, and that blind testing is a valuable approach to
appraising diagnostic methods.
