FROM MODERN TO CONTEMPORARY SOCIETIES (LATE 16TH-EARLY 20TH CENTURY): EVOLUTION OF
HEALTH STATUS IN TWO SOUTHEASTERN FRANCE POPULATIONS
Author(s): Perrin, Marie - Schmitt, Aurore - Ardagna, Yann (Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, EFS, ADES)
Presentation Format: Oral
Health status of modern and contemporary population has hardly been investigated in France from biological material. The period
covering the late 16th to early 20th century, has long been set aside from bioarchaeological concerns and few modern cemeteries have been excavated. Yet, it witnessed many significant transformations in socioeconomic, political and cultural spheres
that led on to the threshold of modern industrialized societies.
The recent excavations of two cemeteries, St Jacques in La Ciotat, (1581-1831) and Les Crottes in Marseille (1784-1905), have
allowed the constitution of a considerable osteological assemblage. It offers the unique opportunity to study on a large scale the
evolution of health state during that peculiar period and specifically during the early time of industrialization.
A complete macroscopic analysis of oro-dental pathologies was carried out on 669 individuals. Ante mortem tooth losses, dental
caries, calculus, dental wear, periapical abscesses and periodontal disease were considered as indicators of oral health. Moreover, the examination of dental enamel hypoplasia was assessed for every preserved tooth. This non-specific stress marker
suggests physiological disturbances during childhood, mainly caused by nutritional deficiencies and infectious diseases.
The results reveal a high and rising prevalence of caries and ante mortem tooth losses in a context of important dietary changes,
a lack of oral hygiene, and a limited access to dental care. The examination of dental enamel hypoplasias indicates that deficiencies were very usual during childhood. If food shortages became scarce by the 19th century, the increase of hypoplasia could
reveal no real improvement in the quality of everyday diet. Also, large urbanized centre, such as Marseille, became rapidly overcrowded from the 1830s, leading to poor sanitary conditions that emphasised the development of infectious diseases.
