‘UBIQUITOUS MONUMENTS, UBIQUITOUS PLACES’. CURRENT RESEARCH IN BARROW LANDSCAPES
FROM PREHISTORIC TO MODERN TIMES
Theme: Interpreting the archaeological record: artefacts, humans and landscapes
Organisers: Carrero-Pazos, Miguel (University of Santiago de Compostela, GEPN-AAT; Leiden University, Faculty of Archaeology) - Rodríguez-Del Cueto, Fernando (University of Oviedo) - Szubski, Michał (Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University, Institute
of Archaeology)
Format: Regular session
This session aims the historical and archaeological analysis of one of the most common archaeological remains in Europe, such
as the barrow monuments are.
The presence of similarity in monumental architecture and interchange of material culture in long-distanced territories of modern days Europe was used to indicate a common world of shared beliefs, not only as a remarkable thread of cultural similarity
across Europe but also as a result of a high probable degree of connectivity between these territories during prehistoric times
and afterwards.
All of this has led as well to common archaeological problems in the research of barrow landscapes, and the aim of this session
is to share both historical and methodological problems, no matter the chronology of the monuments. The proposed session will
bring together specialists from different periods and regions with the aim of discussing, through a variety of case studies and
methodological approaches, the analysis of such moundscapes.
The session will be structured in the following topics:
•
Data acquisition and dissemination. From archaeological survey to excavation: remote prospection, teledetection
(LiDAR, aerial photography, drones), and new ways to get archaeological data - 3D modelling, automatic and semi-automatic archaeological detection. Also problems in heritage management and difficulties to preserve a high number of
newly detected structures.
•
Identification: similarity in barrow morphology and modern mounds (such as kilns, boundary features) - how to distinguish them and investigate.
•
Time: Problems in dating cluster of barrows and possible solutions without excavations - e.g. Bayesian approaches.
•
Monument: Specific case studies which show the results of excavations and reutilisation processes in modern times.
•
Monumental landscapes: Case studies at landscape scale, with integration of GIS and statistical approaches to model
locational preferences and human behaviour, computationally-informed landscape archaeology.
