THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE INVISIBLE: LANDLESS SUBALTERNS IN RURAL SWEDEN (C. 1700- 1850)
Author(s): Nilsson, Pia (The Archaeologist, National Historical Museums) - Hansson, Martin (Department of Archaeology and
Ancient History, Lund University) - Svensson, Eva (Environmental Science, Risk and Environmental Sciences Karlstad University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Hidden in the written sources, neglected by the contemporary land-surveyors and with none or vague traces left in the landscape, the subalterns heritage is to a considerable degree invisible to us. Archaeology is a useful tool to understand and reveal
several aspects of their heritage. But, due to several reasons, the archaeological remains of the subalterns (crofters, lodgers,
poor-house inmates etc.) are often explicitly considered of limited or no value in connection with contract archaeology and research. Hereby, the heritage and our knowledge about a tremendously large part of the population in the period c 1700 – 1850
vanishes rapidly.
When it comes to the archaeological heritage of the subalterns the excavation, if any is considered necessary, in general is restricted by factors such as low cost, limited resources, inexplicit questions and vague interpretations.
This is in obvious contrast to the prevalent view among the public, where the landless subalterns´ heritage is highly appreciated and important because it concerns our history, identity, democracy, continuity and sense of belonging. The heritage of the
subalterns, including inhabitants in rural as well as urban slums, is also relevant in order to be able to observe and to understand
processes in the society, and in the world, today.
This paper will address, by examples from Swedish contract archaeology practice, some reasons why the antiquarian archaeological interest is limited, or at least staggering. We will also try to identify questions and goals for the archaeological work, as
well as to suggest priorities and methods. Our aim is to contribute to an improved heritage practice, where the heritage of the
invisible majority is found, interpreted and told.
