FUNERARY TAPHONOMY AS A KEY TO THE SOCIAL BIOARCHAEOLOGY OF THE MYCENAEAN PERIOD
Author(s): Moutafi, Ioanna (University of Cambridge)
Presentation Format: Oral
The onset of the Late Bronze Age in the Greek mainland (ca. 1700 BC) saw significant changes in the mortuary customs, closely
related to the wider socio-political developments of the period and the emergence of ‘Mycenaean’ societies. The most distinctive change was a shift from single inhumations to collective burials, a custom that prevailed through the entire palatial Mycenaean era (1500-1200 BC), undergoing its final transformation in post-palatial times (1200-1050 BC). Despite the growing
interest of archaeological research in the social dimensions of Mycenaean collective burials, truly integrative bioarchaeological
approaches are still rare. As a result, funerary activities, particularly the treatment of the body, are only partially reconstructed.
A wide variety of specific acts are often lumped under the term ‘collective burial’, while, in fact, they may reflect rather different
ideological notions. The issue is further complicated due to inherent problems of the taphonomic record of collective tombs, and
the special challenges in discerning temporal variation of the secondary acts within a tomb.
This paper investigates the complex relationship between funerary treatment and wider social dynamics, based on a multidisciplinary taphonomic approach to human skeletal remains and associated mortuary data. This approach integrates up-to-date theoretical reflection in mortuary archaeology with scientific advances in the study of collective skeletal assemblages. Discussing
a large body of bioarchaeological data from the Late Bronze Age chamber tomb cemetery of Voudeni, Achaea, Greece, it will be
shown that even subtle changes in collective burial rites often represent meaningful social acts. Therefore, funerary taphonomy
is essential for a detailed and accurate reconstruction of mortuary practices and their associated social meanings.
