GEOARCHAEOLOGY OF ANCIENT SOILS AND OFF-SITE FEATURES
Author(s): Eckmeier, Eileen (Ludwig-Maximilians University Muenchen) - Gerlach, Renate (LVR-Amt für Bodendenkmalpflege
im Rheinland)
Presentation Format: Oral
The analysis of soil material that was preserved in archaeological features can deliver geochemical information about environmental conditions and anthropogenic activities at the time the sediment was deposited, even though macroscopic artefacts are
missing. Geoarchaeology can therefore be a valuable tool for investigating past human activities at the edges of habited areas,
and examples for geochemical and sedimentological analysis of off-site features will be presented here.
A main focus will be on Schlitzgruben, which usually appear at the edges of prehistoric settlements, and which could be described
as an intermediate pit feature between on- and off-site. They have rarely been investigated in greater detail, also because they
usually do not contain any archaeological findings. Their function is under discussion since they were firstly documented, and
theories cover a variety of uses. One of the first explanations is having a current renaissance, the function as a hunting pit. Often
the pits were constructed after the settlement was deserted, which means the area was a clearing in the forest that is attractive for game for feeding and therefore also as space for hunting. Examples from the Rhineland strengthen this hypothesis.
Although Schlitzgruben have mainly been found on or close to Neolithic settlement areas, and although they are usually filled
with Neolithic dark soil material, their stratigraphical position showed that they were dug after the Neolithic structures have
been deserted. The pit fillings never contained bone fragments and hardly any charcoal particles. Therefore, only two 14C-ages
are available, which both date to the Mesolithic and early Neolithic. Additionally, OSL (optical stimulated luminescence) dating
of the time the Schlitzgruben were filled with sediment revealed ages between the Mesolithic period and the Middle Neolithic.
