DELTA STORIES: LIVING IN THE LORZE RIVER DELTA FROM THE LATE GLACIAL TO THE ANTHROPOCENE
Author(s): Jecker, David - Reinhard, Jochen (Amt für Denkmalpflege und Archäologie Zug) - Gross, Eda (University of Basel) Huber, Renata - Schaeren, Gishan (Amt für Denkmalpflege und Archäologie Zug)
Presentation Format: Oral
In archaeology, environmental history all too often focused on the individual settlements and on the economic use of their immediate environment. This view fails to acknowledge the importance of other actors (e.g. animals, plants, waters) interacting with
humans. Outside the settlements, the traces of humans and these other actors are entangled and become difficult to discern.
This is especially true for processes in deltas, which are inherently dynamic, complex, short-lived and fragmented. The life and
activities of humans in such areas can only be properly assessed if the habitat as a whole with all its actors is understood and a
long-term perspective is adopted.
Due to intensive construction work in the Lorze Delta since the 1980s, the archaeological department of Canton Zug has carried
out a number of excavations. However, only now has the basic information about the sites (e.g. location, sediments and dating)
been more broadly compiled and the results of the different studies been collated. This has led to ground-breaking insights into
the cultural and natural interactions in the catchment area of the Lorze River.
In the early stages of the Lorze Delta during the Late Glacial and Early Holocene, after the melting of the Reuss Glacier, the
only just populated landscape was characterised by unstable geological conditions. When analysing Neolithic and Bronze Age
pile dwellings, understanding the Lorze Delta’s formation is a prerequisite for appreciating the sites’ location. In the alluvial fan,
long-term changes in human and riverine activity from the Bronze Age to the Middle Ages can be detected. Today, human impact
instead of geological processes write the delta’s story: the river course has been diverted to give way for a motorway while the
delta itself has been altered artificially.
