PUBLIC RELATIONS AND COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES ON PREHISTORY IN THE (POST) NAZI ERA
Author(s): Groemer, Karina (Natural History Museum Vienna) - Loew, Carmen (Kuratorium Pfahlbauten)
Presentation Format: Oral
Science communication and public relations are decisive for the way in which archeology - in this case research on prehistory and
early history - is perceived in public. In recent years, more and more archaeological content is presented in the media, especially
in social networks. Initially, however, less archaeologists than rather those people who are skeptical about them: probe walkers,
treasure hunters, local researchers reach with their followers on YouTube and Twitter ever larger audiences and shape more and
more the image that the public has of archeology.
It is only with hesitation that archaeologists themselves startet to use these channels and thus also the almost limitless possibilities of communicating with the public independently and without mediation by journalists. As a result, however, the private
”competitors” do not necessarily lose in popularity, because the general public seems to have a hard time dealing with the common communication style of our scientific field.
This style of communication, especially performed by scientists from Austria and Germany, which is very limited to the ”brittle
technical”, is rooted in the history of archeology and its public relations work, especially during the NS regime. The lecture uses
the example of museum dissemination to show how archaeology and its scientific results were communicated in the period
between 1938 and 1945 and what messages were sent with it. There has been an over-use and mis-use of archaeology for
ideological and propaganda issues (NS racial fanatism; ”Arian” master race) – even war and occupations (e.g. in Poland) have been
justified and disseminated using archaeological traces. This did not remain without consequences for science communication of
prehistory and early history and affected them well beyond the post-war period until the end of the 20th century.
