STABLE ISOTOPE RANGES IN MODERN DOMESTIC PIGS COMPARED WITH THEIR DIET AND
ENVIRONMENTAL SURROUNDINGS
Author(s): Anders, Dominic - Vohberger-Herles, Marina - Osmanovic, Amira (Ludwig-Maximilans-Universität München)
Presentation Format: Oral
The analysis of stable isotopes in bioarchaeology was established as an important tool over the past decades. In general, stable
isotope ratios serve as natural markers for different transport processes of matter through the geosphere, hydrosphere and
biosphere.
In physical anthropology, stable isotope ratios can be used to detect possible migrations or trading of ancient populations or
individuals, for the reconstruction of dietary habits, palaeobiodiverstity and climatic conditions.
However there is a lack of experimental data to verify existing models to distinguish local from non-local individuals. Various
species specific physiological and metabolic peculiarities are unknown. One such specific concern is the source partitioning of
stable isotopic ratios into the different consumers’ tissues such as bone, teeth, blood, and meat, as well as the natural variation
of isotopic ratios within one species at one location.
The SPOCK-project (Source partitioning of stable isotopes in the body tissues of livestock) aims to fill this knowledge gap by
analysing stable strontium and oxygen isotopes in domestic pigs which are commonly used for reconstructing migratory events.
Strontium results show that there is a relation between water source, food and body tissue but no influence by underlying soil.
The effect of biopurification can be observed and there is evidence that even small proportions of non-local food components
can noticeably alter the isotopic composition of body tissues.
First oxygen results indicate that the nursing effect might be much higher in pigs, than what is known for humans. Several linear
regression and mass balance models are applied to the oxygen data, leading to more or less promising results.
This research project was funded by LMU Munich‘s Institutional Strategy LMUexcellent within the framework of the German
Excellence Initiative.
