IT’S DIFFERENT IN THE MOUNTAINS: COMMUNITY ARCHAEOLOGY OF AN INHABITED MEDIEVAL
SETTLEMENT IN CENTRAL ASTURIAS, SPAIN
Author(s): Fernández Fernández, Jesús (University of Oviedo; University College London) - Moshenska, Gabriel (University
College London)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper reports on the work and findings of the first four years of the Community archaeology of the commons in Asturias project, a collaboration between UCL and the La Ponte Ecomuseum to investigate the development of the settlement of Villanueva
de Santo Adriano from the early medieval period to the present.
In mountainous regions such as central Asturias with restricted space and resources, settlements tend to remain in place. Virtually all villages named in medieval documents in this region have survived into the present: the number of deserted medieval
villages is not significant. This hypothesis has been explored archaeologically, and in the case of Villanueva in some detail. Here,
a climate catastrophe – heavy rainfall at the onset of the Little Ice Age causing a devastating flash flood – destroyed the core
of the medieval settlement, but the new village ‘Villanueva’ was built only a few hundred metres away (Fernández et al. 2017).
The restriction in this region, where only inhabited villages can be studied, demands a distinctive approach. Our research began
with test-pitting to study stratigraphy and collect soil samples, and has extended to the excavation of agricultural land in the
village to study its economic basis. This latter excavation – focusing on land buried in the flash flood – has provided materials for
pollen analysis, soil chemistry, and radiocarbon dating.
Studying an occupied village means working with a living community: in Villanueva this has been achieved through the La Ponte
Ecomuseum, a community-owned heritage centre that coordinates research, promotes tourism through guided tours, and provides a hub for preserving and promoting tangible and intangible cultural heritage.
Fernández, J., G. Moshenska and E. Iriarte. 2017. Archaeology and Climate Change: Evidence of a Flash-flood During the LIA in
Asturias (NW Spain) and its Social Consequences. Environmental Archaeology
