GENOMIC INSIGHTS INTO 3RD MILLENNIUM B.C. BOHEMIA
Author(s): Papac, Luka (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena) - Ernée, Michal - Dobeš, Miroslav (Institute of Archaeology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague) - Krause, Johannes (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human
History, Jena; Faculty of Biosciences, University of Jena) - Schiffels, Stephan - Haak, Wolfgang (Max Planck Institute for the
Science of Human History, Jena)
Presentation Format: Oral
Beginning in the 3rd millennium B.C., the genetic makeup of ancient Europeans shows increasing affinity to contemporaneous
individuals from the Eurasian steppe. This ‘steppe ancestry’ component subsequently spreads to every corner of Europe and is
today a major component of the ancestry of most extant Europeans. In order to shed further light on the timing, dynamics and
consequences of the introduction of this ‘steppe ancestry’ into central Europe, we analyse genomic capture data from 136 Late
Neolithic and Early Bronze Age individuals from 15 sites in central Bohemia. We find that, despite the sites being geographically
close to one another, individuals are heterogeneous in relation to their local hunter-gatherer ancestries. Interestingly, we identify
a possible admixture cline between our Late Neolithic Bohemian individuals and a source with high Eastern hunter-gatherer related ancestry, currently best represented by Lithuanian Neolithic individuals of the Narva culture. We first detect the presence
of ‘steppe ancestry’ in individuals precisely dated to 2,900 BC found in Corded Ware archaeological contexts. Early carriers of
this ‘steppe ancestry’ can be found buried in close proximity to individuals without ‘steppe ancestry’ at the same burial site.
The genetic makeup of later Bell Beaker and Bronze Age individuals can be explained as mixtures of preceding Late Neolithic
populations and a significant proportion of incoming steppe-related ancestry. We also detect a number of interesting outlier
individuals which add to our understanding of the dynamics and regional nuances of population interactions in 3rd millennium
B.C. central Europe.
