USING STANDARDISED SAMPLES AND CONTROLLED EXPERIMENTS TO EVALUATE THE ROLE OF RAW
MATERIAL IN LITHIC EDGE DURABILITY AND EFFICIENCY
Author(s): Pedergnana, Antonella (TraCEr, Laboratory for Traceology and Controlled Experiments at MONREPOS Archaeological Research Centre and Museum for Human Behavioural Evolution, RGZM) - Malinsky-Buller, Ariel (MONREPOS Archaeological
Research Centre and Museum for Human Behavioural Evolution, RGZM) - Gneisinger, Walter (TraCEr, Laboratory for Traceology
and Controlled Experiments at MONREPOS Archaeological Research Centre and Museum for Human Behavioural Evolution,
RGZM) - Marreiros, Joao (TraCEr, Laboratory for Traceology and Controlled Experiments at MONREPOS Archaeological Research Centre and Museum for Human Behavioural Evolution, RGZM; ICArEHB, Interdisciplinary Center for Archaeology and
Evolution Human Behaviour, University of Algarve)
Presentation Format: Poster
The organisation of hunter-gatherer lithic technologies entails decision-making regarding the raw material selection, integration
of strategies for producing, using, transporting, and discarding tools. Thus, lithic assemblages are the outcome of long chains
of decision-making processes. A less studied perspective on those decision-making processes is the role that raw material
performance had on the past blank selection for tool use. The goal of this project is to evaluate the efficiency of lithic cutting
edges according to raw material. Much work has been done to understand which parameters influence the efficiency and durability of cutting edges (e.g., Collins, 2008; McPherron et al., 2014; Dogandžić et al., 2015; Eren and Lycett, 2015; Key and Lycett,
2015). However, these studies were generally based on the use of knapped samples. In this way, edge morphology and surface
topography diverge among samples.
In this study, we aim to assess the role of raw material in edge durability and efficiency during use. The novelty of this work is the
use of a mechanical setup which allows testing one variable at a time while the others are kept constant. In such a set-up, factors
such as force, friction, number of strokes, and velocity can be measured and quantified.
The first step of our experimental programme is to compare four fine and coarse-grained lithologies. Standardised samples
(i.e. machine-cut) have been used to perform longitudinal unidirectional movements (in a whittling motion) on selected wooden
specimens.
A 3D High-resolution scanner and a 3D digital microscope have been used to document the loss of material as well as changes in
edge measurements and outline before use and after different stages of use (250, 500 and 1000 strokes).
Our observations on the analysed sample allowed us to evaluate the influence of the different properties of different raw materials on edge fracturing modes.
