3D REAPPRAISAL OF TREPANATIONS AT ST COSME PRIORY BETWEEN THE 12TH AND THE 15TH
CENTURIES, FRANCE
Author(s): Bédécarrats, Samuel - Miclon, Valentin (UMR CITERES 7324 - LAT; Université de Tours) - Travers, Nadine (CHRU
Tours) - GAULTIER, Matthieu (SADIL; UMR CITERES 7324 - LAT) - Herrscher, Estelle (Aix-Marseille Université; UMR 7269 LAMPEA) - Coqueugniot, Hélène (UMR 5199 PACEA; Université de Bordeaux; Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes - EPHE)
Presentation Format: Oral
Bone surgery is the most explicit testimony of care observable on ancient human remains. From the 12th century onwards,
surgery was taught in universities. The late Middle Ages is therefore a context allowing a direct comparison between bones and
texts. However, archaeological examples are quite spare and constituted mainly of isolated cases. In this study, we present six
cases of cranial interventions uncovered at St Cosme priory in the center of France (La Riche, Indre-et-Loire).
The palaeopathological study was complemented by the use of computed tomography (CTscan) and microtomodensitometry
(μCTscan). In order to discuss neurological health status, a protocol of reconstruction of virtual endocast was implemented. The
3D models obtained were analyzed morphologically, metrically and using tools from geometric morphometrics.
Along with the palaeopathological approach, a study of palaeodiet was conducted by analyzing carbon and nitrogen isotopes
for a total of 55 individuals: although diet is regulated in monastic communities, exceptions to the rule exist for ill people. Thus
research of specificities in diet for trepanned subjects brings new insights on medieval care.
Regarding the results, surgical procedures observable within the sample are consistent with the practice described in medieval
surgical treatises. In those texts, trepanation is used for cleaning cranial traumas. Paleopathological analysis provides evidence
of neurological disorders for five of the six cases studied suggesting that, in this population, trepanation was most often used
to treat neuronal disorder. All those observations bring the discussion to the link between medical treatises and archaeological
cases.
