DIFFERENT WORLDS, DISTANT EPOCHS, DIVERGENT SOCIETIES AND A COMMON PLACE. A CASE
STUDY OF BURIAL MOUNDS FROM MUSZKOWICE, SOUTH-WESTERN POLAND
Author(s): Przybyl, Agnieszka (Institute of Archaeology, University of Wrocław)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Muszkowice Forest, a wooded area in the Sudeten Foreland in south-western Poland (Lower Silesia), represents an almost
perfectly preserved sacred landscape. It is marked by the presence of dozens of prehistoric and early mediaeval burial mounds.
In a fairly small area there are as many as 35 separate burial places, including 16 monumental cemeteries with Neolithic earthen
long barrows and 19 clusters of much smaller round barrows, which have been identified thanks to the use of LiDAR scanning.
All of the latter were probably much younger than the former, and some of them can be associated with the Early Middle Ages.
In my presentation I focus on a particular case study from Muszkowice, with the example of early medieval burial mounds and
Neolithic monumental barrow co-occurrence in one common place. The excavations carried out in 2018 have revealed two small
artificial round mounds which were established in superposition to the Neolithic barrow. Despite previously conducted non-invasive prospection with the use of both airborne and terrestrial laser scanning, the small cremation cemetery had remained hidden.
These not very large barrows, with the remains of the cremation burials, were discovered only during the site excavations.
This case study shows that, even with the use of modern non-invasive methods of prospection to recognize and document
archaeological features, with theoretically well-preserved covering mounds, the results obtained do not always fully reflect the
real nature of the relics. Therefore a proper archaeological diagnosis, so important in the management of archaeological heritage, requires an appropriate and painstaking approach, taking into account the circumstances of a particular case.
The studies presented were conducted with the financial support of the National Science Centre, research project No.
2017/25/B/HS3/01442.
