TECHNOLOGY AND FUNCTION OF NON-FLINT LITHIC ARTEFACTS DURING THE UPPER PALAEOLITHIC: A
CASE STUDY FROM SOUTHWESTERN FRANCE (LE LANDRY, DORDOGNE)
Author(s): Villeneuve, Quentin (UMR 5199 PACEA, Université de Bordeaux) - Brenet, Michel (INRAP; UMR 5199 PACEA, Université de Bordeaux) - Bracco, Jean-Pierre (UMR 7269 LAMPEA, Université Aix Marseille) - Ducasse, Sylvain (UMR 5199 PACEA,
Université de Bordeaux)
Presentation Format: Poster
Flint was the main lithic raw material used by hunter-gatherer groups in southwestern France. However, the archaeological record
shows that a large variety of other lithic resources (quartz, granite, basalt, etc.) was collected and exploited. Due to its focus
on flint artefacts, earlier research on Upper Palaeolithic lithic industries had a general lack of consideration towards other rock
types and their techno-economic role. Over the last thirty years, a growing interest in this matter resulted in the adaptation of
“classical” methods of flint lithic analysis in order to understand the technological, economic and functional aspects of non-flint
lithic industries.
As a case study, we present the non-flint component of the Late Solutrean lithic industry from the open-air site of Landry (Dordogne, France). Our ongoing study, combining petrographic, technological and functional analyses, gives a glimpse of the importance these resources can have in hunter-gatherers’ activities. Alongside significant exploitation of local flint resources, this
assemblage demonstrates the use of quartzite and dolerite cobbles. These two resources were used within the lithic production
system, both as percussion tools for lithic reduction (hammerstones, anvils) and as raw material for blank production. A techno-functional analysis of numerous cobbles with polished surfaces also reveals their use in grinding activities. The presence
of multifunctional tools and recycled implements shows the integration of diverse activities. This case study provides insights
concerning the technological, economic and functional place of non-flint lithic artefacts in Upper Palaeolithic technical systems.
