KHAPURA: AN IMPORTANT EARLY SETTLEMENT BETWEEN GHAGHARA AND TONS RIVER IN DISTRICT
AMBEDKAR NAGAR, UTTAR PRADESH, INDIA
Author(s): Singh, Pushp Lata - Shukla, Dipak Kumar (Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi)
Presentation Format: Oral
The present paper is primarily based on recent archaeological excavation at Khapura lies in between Ghaghara and Tons river in
district Ambedkarnagar, Uttar Pradesh, about 50 km away from Ayodhya.
The ancient mound of Khapura extend over an area of 600×800 m and its height is approx 4 metre from the surrounding ground
level. The excavation was conducted under my direction in field season 2017-18. The excavation brought to light two fold cultural
sequences ranging from circa 1000 B.C.E. to circa 200 B.C.E. without any break in occupation. The deposit of the earliest habitation belongs to the Pre-Northern Black Polished Ware. The main Ceramic industries of this period are black slipped ware, red
ware, black and red ware. The other material remains are carnelian beads, terracotta beads, terracotta disc, wheels, iron objects
and bone objects etc. The important aspect is the occurrence of Pre-Northern Black Polished Ware phase with iron from the first
time in this region.
The period II adheres to northern black polished ware culture. The ceramic comprises northern black polished ware, black slipped
ware, red ware and grey ware. The evidence of mud floors, hearths and ovens recovered from the excavations. The material
remains include semi precious stone beads, terracotta, stone, copper, iron objects and decorated bone arrowheads. A large
number of archaeobotanical and archaeozoological remains were collected from the site.
On one hand the material remains of Khapura shows that the ancient settlement had cultural contacts with the settlement of
Sarayupar (Ghaghara) region and on the other hand with sites like Rajghat, located on the river Ganges. The location of Khapura is
very important as it lies on the trade route from Kashi (Rajghat) to Koshal (Ayodhya).
