IN A POST-TRUTH WORLD IT IS THE POWER (OF EXPRESSION) AND LANGUAGE (GAMES) THAT MATTERS
Author(s): Baca, Martin (Department of Archaeology, Faculty of Arts, Comenius University in Bratislava)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper is loosely inspired by Timothy Snyder´s last book „The road to unfreedom“. I will deal with the nature of concepts and
how we archaeologists/people communicate with each other. We shall discuss the word „fascism“, the word used/abused today
maybe more than ever since the 1930s. This abuse in former Eastern bloc has its roots in communist propaganda of the 70s/80s,
when we were taught, that fascism is a danger coming from the west. Therefore this word generates much more different meaning to general population for example in Britain, than to general population in former Czechoslovakia. It is associated with German
Nazism and with liberal democracy at the same time – an extraordinary paradox. In a world, which wants to express itself into a
few sentences on social media (140 characters on Twitter), the shortcuts which means everything and nothing at the same time
are crucial. Therefore the abuse of word „fascism“ goes hand in hand with completely new words such as „slniečkár“ („sluníčkár“
in Czech language) – the person who sees the world as great place to live for everyone. Because in a populists world, only the
people seen as „normal“ or „ours“ are people which should share the same world with them. This is actually something, which
falls into the nature of what word „fascism“ should mean. For populists of today – concepts of love, welfare, hope and the most
importantly – the truth – are deconstructed, shredded to pieces. We are in war with populism, this schizo-fascism, we are losing
and we have to fight back. We as archaeologists cannot remain silent. We have to explain the complexity and colourfulness of
the past to the public, so they will understand. Remember, the people who adore the “narratives of eternity” are stealing the past
for themselves.
