MESS IS GREAT. IT CHANGES THE CORE! THE NATIONAL TRUST OF AUSTRALIA (VICTORIA) AND
PRODUCTIVE MESSINESS
Author(s): de Jong, Ursula (Deakin University, Geelong) - Garduno Freeman, Cristina (The University of Melbourne)
Presentation Format: Oral
The National Trust of Australia (Victoria) offers a way to examine how ‘messiness’ is productive for the practice and discipline of
heritage. Since its establishment in 1956, the work of the National Trust has moved from the cutting edge of the past - classifying ‘old buildings’ - to the cutting edge of the present - digital advocacy and activism. The core of heritage lies in fixed structures,
legislation and governance, charters, conventions, designations and lists across multiple levels. But fundamentally heritage is
a social phenomenon – it is about people, and what they value and therefore is constantly changing. As an independent member-based organisation The National Trust has always worked on the fringe where the messiness lies. In the 1960s and 1970s
social value was not recognised, peoples’ voices were not heard; their voices muted from the core. But by the 1990s social value
was embedded in the Burra Charter. The edges, the mess had changed the core of heritage. Today the National Trust continues
to operate at the periphery, seeking to extend heritage by advocating for the recent as well as the past. The Trust’s 2018 nomination of Melbourne’s Federation Square challenges traditional perceptions, as does the digital activism led by the organisation
to retain the public square for the city’s people. The edges and core of heritage are constantly shifting, and this is a good thing.
While their relationship is transient, discordant and truculent, it is essential, as it provides the energy and movement that pushes
the fringes into the core. Of-course the National Trust is just one organisation disrupting the core. But its story can resonate with
the purpose of such work and allow us to appreciate how the contingent, ambiguous and dynamic roles such organisations play
are as critical as the core instruments that govern heritage.
