THE DEFENSIVE SYSTEM OF HILLFORTS: THE CASE OF ENVIRONMENT TRANSFORMATIONS IN
KERNAVĖ, THE HISTORICAL CAPITAL OF LITHUANIA
Author(s): Velius, Gintautas - Vengalis, Rokas - Kuncevicius, Albinas - Poskiene, Justina - Volungevicius, Jonas (Vilnius University)
Presentation Format: Oral
Kernavė archaeological site encompasses diverse archaeological objects from different prehistoric and medieval periods. The
site is under investigation over 40 years. Kernavė is a place of exceptional significance in the context of history of Lithuania’s
statehood – the residence of the Grand Duke, the impressive defensive system of hillforts, the town of craftspeople and merchants were situated there in the 13th–14th centuries.
During the past year, an interdisciplinary research focused on the group of five hillforts. It was carried out in the framework of the
scientific project “Landscape of the Statehood: Environment Transformation in the Historical Capitals of Lithuania” (supported
by the Research Council of Lithuania). The following research strategy was applied: systemization and synchronization of the archaeological data on paleorelief and its change; application of non-destructive and minimally destructive field research methods
aiming to examine environmental transformations, as well as the scale, character and chronology of earthworks. Geophysical
non-destructive (GPR, magnetometer) and minimally destructive (power auger and hand auger boreholes’ survey, archaeological
test pits) field methods were applied. Paleopedological research was carried out: evidence obtained by non-destructive methods and boreholes’ data were interpreted in regard to paleosoils and the circumstances for the development of the defensive
landscape were revealed. Precise chronology was obtained by C14 AMS method.
The ultimate goals were to indicate the chronology and process of the Iron Age settlements’ fortification; to ascertain the chronology and circumstances for the establishment of the integral defensive system of hillforts; to reveal the scale and character
of the earthworks (e. g., setting out ditches and ramparts), which were carried out in order to transform the environment in Kernavė, the historical capital of Lithuania.
