USING LITHIC ARTEFACT DENSITY AS A TOOL FOR UNDERSTANDING HUNTER-GATHERERS MOBILITY
SYSTEMS: THE CASE OF NESHER RAMLA UPPER SEQUENCE
Author(s): Centi, Laura - Hovers, Erella - Zaidner, Yossi (Hebrew University of Jerusalem)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Middle Palaeolithic open-air site of Nesher Ramla is located in central Israel and yielded an eight-meter-thick archaeological
sequence. Human occupations took place in situ within a karst depression. This study focuses on the lithic assemblages of the
upper part of the Nesher Ramla sequence (Units I-II), where lithic technological organization and lithic artefact density show
significant variations, possibly reflecting shifts in intensity of site use. The archaeological perception of site use intensity is a
combined outcome of the frequency of human occupations at the site, the length of each occupational episode and the number
of people present at the site. Site use intensity gives thus valuable information about mobility dynamics of past populations. In
this work, we analysed a number of proxies, among them composition of the lithic assemblages and the lithic artefact densities.
The interplay between these proxies suggests that during the occupation of Unit II, phases of pronounced mobility alternate with
phases when human groups were less mobile, although the site maintained the same role within the hunter-gatherers mobility
system. In the later phases of human occupation of the site (Unit I), visits to the depression became more sporadic, and possibly
shorter in nature, until the site eventually was abandoned. The recorded shifts in the role that Nesher Ramla played in past hunter-gatherers mobility systems might have been triggered by changes in the shape of the karst depression over time. Finally, a
comparison with other Levantine Middle Palaeolithic sites suggest that even in the phases of more intense occupation, Nesher
Ramla Upper sequence was never used as a base camp, but rather its role shifted from short term camp to ephemeral camp.
