TRENCH ART – BETWEEN UTILITARIANISM, ARTISTIC VALUE AND MEANING. HAPTIC OBSERVATION OF
OBJECTS CREATED AND REWORKED BY SOLDIERS
Author(s): Niebylski, Jakub (Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology)
Presentation Format: Oral
The trench art is a broad art category which incorporates a wide spectrum of objects created by soldiers, civilians, and prisoners
of war during the war or just after the end of war. The oldest samples are connected to the modern war conflicts, however some
are present from the nowadays battles as well. The trench art samples are often discovered next to the personal items, equipment, and armaments upon the archaeological sites related to the 1st and 2nd World Wars.
The trench art also includes objects created from scratch under field conditions in the time of need, as well as the standard
equipment with the functional modifications which occasionally lead to a totally different application of the tool. Under the
definition of trench art fall also the objects created for commemorating battles and places, as well as personalized objects of
everyday usage often decorated with scratched or dotted ornaments. Such ornaments usually represent anthropomorphic, zoomorphic or floristic images. Very frequently the ornaments pose as a rich source of information containing inscriptions or quotes,
as well dates and signatures. Such pieces of information may be helpful for identifying the soldier, as well as reconstructing his
military route.
The scientific studies of the trench art artifacts from the battlefields and war cemeteries enables us to get a better understanding of their creators i.e. soldiers. During this studies one must test a piece of the trench art organoleptically, for in such a way one
can interpret and read the intentions of its creator. Such pieces of trench art are often exhibited in the glass showcases which
limit the observation of the objects in the haptic dimension. The sensual experiences which go along with the demonstrating the
use of the object help us understand why the specific material or specific ready-made parts were used.
