MORE THAN BULLSHIT! INTERDISCIPLINARY INVESTIGATION OF DUNG LAYERS FROM TWO
PREHISTORIC SITES AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE AT THE MICRO- AND MACRO-SCALE
Author(s): Brönnimann, David (Integrative Prehistory and Archeological Science - IPAS, University of Basel; Archäologische
Bodenforschung des Kantons Basel-Stadt) - Akeret, Örni (Integrative Prehistory and Archeological Science - IPAS, University
of Basel) - Knipper, Corina (Curt Engelhorn Centre Archaeometry GmbH) - Rissanen, Hannele (Archäologische Bodenforschung
des Kantons Basel-Stadt; Integrative Prehistory and Archeological Science - IPAS, University of Basel) - Stopp, Barbara (Integrative Prehistory and Archeological Science - IPAS, University of Basel) - Thew, Nigel (Independent researcher) - Wegmüller,
Fabio (Kantonsarchäologie St. Gallen; Integrative Prehistory and Archeological Science - IPAS, University of Basel)
Presentation Format: Oral
With the help of micromorphological analysis, dung cannot only be recognized in archaeological layers, but can also often be
linked to the species that produced it. The identification of dung at the micro-scale is an exciting achievement, but it’s only a first
small step towards understanding an archaeological layer and perhaps the site itself. In this paper, we present two case studies
where the interpretation of preserved dung has been taken to the next level using a multi-disciplinary approach.
The first site is a rock shelter located in the Alpine Rhine Valley of north-eastern Switzerland. It was used rather frequently from
the Mesolithic to the Bronze Age, but in a variety of different ways. Micromorphological analysis has shown that the Neolithic and
Bronze Age layers consist largely of burnt dung.
The second site is the Late Iron Age open air settlement Basel-Gasfabrik in north-western Switzerland. It was an unfortified central site with important trading connections to both the immediate and wider surrounding areas. Extensive geoarchaeological
investigations have shown that more or less well preserved herbivore dung occurs in different archaeological structures.
To interpret the geoarchaeologically proven presence of herbivore dung at these two sites, a number of methodological approaches were chosen, including isotopic, archaeobotanical, archaeozoological and malacological investigations, as well as ethnological comparisons.
