HIDDEN STAIRWAYS AT THE FOOT OF THE HIMALAYA – RESULTS OF GEOPHYSICAL SURVEYS AND
EXCAVATIONS IN THE PHOBJIKHA VALLEY, BHUTAN
Author(s): Ullrich, Burkart (Eastern Atlas) - Bader, Christian (Swiss-Liechtenstein Foundation for Archaeological Research
Abroad SLSA, Zurich) - Della Casa, Philippe (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology, Institute of Archaeology, University of
Zurich) - Fux, Peter (Museum Rietberg Zurich) - Hart, Benjamin - Keiser, Alexander (Department of Prehistoric Archaeology,
Institute of Archaeology, University of Zurich) - Tenzin, Karma (Section of Archaeology, Division for Conservation of Heritage
Sites - DCHS, Department of Culture, Ministry of Home and Cultural Affairs, Royal Government of Bhutan)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper presents preliminary results of recent geophysical and archaeological investigations in the Sacred Phobjikha Valley
in central Bhutan, one of the key research areas of the Bhutan-Swiss Archaeology Project initiated by the Royal Government of
Bhutan, the Swiss-Liechtenstein Foundation for Archaeological Research Abroad and the University of Zurich.
Initial research recorded approximately 50 artificial standalone and grouped mounds at the edges of the glacial valley. Most
of the mounds are a few meters high but sky-rising hills are also known from aerial pictures. The recent damaging of one of the
largest mounds near the Ngelung Drechagling Lhakhang monastery highlights the need for further knowledge to protect the
endangered cultural heritage. So far, little is known about their function, chronology, and construction.
In 2018, high resolution geophysical surveys using ground penetrating radar (GPR) and electrical resistivity tomography (ERT)
were executed at six selected mounds of varying shape, dimensions, and preservation state. The work was conducted in close
cooperation between specialists and cultural officers from the Department of Culture of the Bhutan Ministry of Home and Cultural Affairs, who were trained in the application of nondestructive survey methods as part of the educational program of the
project.
Here we present the preliminary results of the investigated mounds. The 3D-geophysical data give detailed insights in their
construction up to 3 m below the surface. In horizontal slices and cross-sections of some of the surveyed mounds an X-shaped
structure in the center can be seen, surrounded by rectangular step-like foundations. Recent excavation at one of the directly
endangered mounds confirm the inner structure and the stairways alike, and reveal further details about the remaining part of
the mound.
