BEYOND BIOLOGICAL BONDS – THE MULTIFACETED PERCEPTION OF KINSHIP-STRUCTURES IN AN
ETHNOARCHAEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
Author(s): Wunderlich, Maria (Institute of Pre- and Protohistoric Archaeology, University Kiel)
Presentation Format: Oral
Given the different phases and regions of the Neolithic in Europe, the interpretations of those societies should be highly variable
and reflect the broad spectrum of cultural traits. Instead, they often follow repeated narratives with too little differentiation. A
theoretical and methodological framework which is in itself adaptable and reflecting a broad spectrum of social mechanism and
behaviors would offer an improved foundation towards the interpretation of social systems.
The importance, functions and organization of kinship structure had been long recognized and constitutes a relevant topic in
Neolithic archaeology. Apart from the fundamental importance of kinship-structures for the interpretation of Neolithic societal
organization, recent improvements of aDNA-analyses are receiving wide attention. Both of these aspects demonstrate the need
of a well-developed theoretical understanding of kinship.
In this talk, I will focus on the different forms and meanings of kinship, as they are documented within ethnoarchaeological case
studies. These examples show, that the interpretation and analysis of such a complex topic must be based on holistic viewpoints
and integrate different data-sets when researched in archaeology. Among them, and of highest importance, are aDNA-analyses,
which shed a light on biological relatedness within Neolithic communities. Nevertheless, biological relatedness represents only
one form of a much broader understanding of kinship. Equally important are different forms of relatedness, which might be based
on and shaped by factors such as everyday interaction, social obligations, interdependencies and mutual aid. All these factors
together form diverse frames, in which kinship is evolved and maintained.
In order to address these topics I will present an ethnoarchaeological case study (Sumba, Indonesia), which is showing an open
understanding of kinship based not only on biological relatedness, but also on networks of action and collective structures. It will
be discussed, to which extend these factors may be identifiable within the archaeological record.
