BURIALS, LAKE DWELLINGS AND TRADE ROUTES. THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIAL STRUCTURES
DURING EARLY BRONZE AGE AT THE CENTRAL ALPS
Author(s): Brunner, Mirco (University of Bern, Institute of Archaeological Science, Prehistory Department; Oeschger Centre
for Climate Change Research - OCCR - Research Group, Prehistory Archeology; Christian-Albrechts Universität zu Kiel, Graduate School «Human Development in Landscapes») - Hafner, Albert (University of Bern, Institute of Archaeological Science,
Prehistory Department; Oeschger Centre for Climate Change Research - OCCR - Research Group, Prehistory Archeology)
Presentation Format: Oral
This paper offers a detailed summary of the state of Early Bronze Age research in Switzerland between the Swiss Plateau and
the alpine region and introduces important grave, hoard and settlement finds. During the Early Bronze Age a large number of rich
Bronze Age burials appear in Western Switzerland often connected to the emergence of bronze metallurgy and the exploitation of local ore deposits. Those graves display burial costumes and include material culture, especially bronze artefacts, which
shows close relations to trans-European way of expressing prestige and status. The development of bronze consumption during
the three phases of the Bronze Age at the central Alpine Area will be discussed.
In the Pre-phase (BzA1), 2200 to 2000 BC, metal finds like oar-headed pins and daggers remain scarce. Only during the classic
phase (BzA2) between 1900 to 1750 BC outstandingly wealthy graves can be recognized, like Thun-Renzenbühl. Considerably
more graves occur; the first hoard finds are deposited at this time. Additionally, gender distinctions in the burial rite become more
regular and is visible in the burial equipment. The spatial extension and increasing density of settlements in prealpine areas and
alpine valleys indicate the importance of the access to trade routes and resources. This development is backed by dendro and
14C dates from lakeshore and hilltop settlements. Between 1750 and 1550 BC gender-specific grave assemblages show strong
contacts to Central Europe. The phenomenon of exceptionally well-equipped male graves is striking. It is discussed whether
these are »young leaders« or assemblages of prosperous families.
Although we see an increasing rise in inequality in the realm of burial costumes the development of Alpine settlement dynamics,
subsistence and metallurgy is a complex process that must not be subsumed to social evolutionist models of the evolution of
hierarchical society.
