SEARCHING FOR ZERO GENDER IDENTITIES IN IBERIAN PREHISTORY
Author(s): Soares, Joaquina (Archaeological Centre of the University of Lisbon; MAEDS - Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography of the District of Setúbal/AMRS)
Presentation Format: Oral
At the center of the world economic system, the male/female opposition seems to be in collapse. Currently with the women
emancipation in the most developed western countries the gender opposition no longer offers sufficient inequality for capital
valorization. But in the peripheries of the system, historical time has another pace and Late Capitalism actively promotes the binary gender and women disempowerment in order to naturalize and legitimate the overexploitation of female labor through false
biological and cultural arguments. In opposition to this political scenario, young and radical movements related to queer theories
claim the zero gender as an individual identity.
Focusing on the Iberian Neolithic we will search for cultural evidence that can deny the “axiomatic” bipolar division of humans in
female and male gender hierarchical categories.
From the Early to the Middle Neolithic, the rock and mobile schematic art we analyze display sexual parity or even a higher social
status for women; this time span corresponds to the zero gender times. After Late Neolithic a slow declining of women status
can be read in the archaeological record simultaneously with the empowerment of men status. In the Bell Beaker period hierarchical binary categories of sex/gender seems to acquire visibility. Therefore, we advocate that patriarchal society could disappear if
binary gender categorization dropped, dissociated from sexual differentiation. Although this statement seems very simple and
may be easily acceptable, in fact for its effectiveness, it will require a crucial social change in the relations of local production
scale and in the current international labor division ruled by a worldwide hegemonic and almost invisible political power system.
