PASTORAL HISTORY IN ALTITUDE IN THE FAUCIGNY MASSIF (NORTHERN FRENCH ALPS): AN HISTORY
TOLD BY ARCHAEOLOGISTS, HISTORIANS AND PALAEOENVIRONMENTALISTS
Author(s): Giguet-Covex, Charline - Blanchet, Claire (EDYTEM) - Guffond, Christophe (Unité d’Archéologie-Conseil départemental de la Haute-Savoie) - Mélo, Alain (Recherche et Valorisation des Patrimoines Historique) - Bajard, Manon (University of
Oslo-Department of Geosciences) - Rey, Pierre-Jérôme - Messager, Erwan (EDYTEM)
Presentation Format: Oral
Mountainous people often developed pastoral activities taking advantage of the altitudinal gradient. In the French Alps, our
knowledge of the history of high-altitude pastures is mostly based on palaeoecological, historical and archaeological researches. With the emergence of molecular biological tools applied on lake sediments, it was possible to identify and reconstruct the
history of the animals who grazed in high-altitude. In this paper, we combine these approaches to document the pastoral history
of three catchments located in the Faucigny Massif (Gers, Anterne and Sales).
Our results show that the first important development of pastures date back to the Late Iron Age at Anterne (sheep and cow
DNA) and the Roman Period at Gers (cow DNA). At Anterne, a shepherd’s hut dating to this period with sheep bones was also discovered by the archaeologists. These activities had a significant impact on soil erosion, which might partly explain the decline of
these activities after the Roman Period. From the 11th century, the activities intensified, with sheep and cows at the beginning
and then, especially cows. The timing of this change differs from site to site (13th- 16th centuries). At Gers, goat DNA was also
detected (11th to 14th and 16th to 19th centuries). Bellow the lakes Laouchets, several huts and enclosures were dated to the
12th-14th and 13th-15th centuries. Archaeological excavations have uncovered bones from cows, sheep and pigs. Other huts,
documented on the Mappe Sarde, were occupied during the 18th and 19th centuries. Historical archives tell us that several families with some livestock lived there and shared the pastures. This mode of exploitation is different from the other sites where
only one shepherd seems to have been in charge of the animals.
