HOW TO DIG A HUGE FLINT NODULE? METHODS OF CHOCOLATE FLINT EXPLOITATIONS BY
CHALCOLITHIC SOCIETIES IN CENTRAL POLAND
Author(s): Szubski, Michal - Budziszewski, Janusz (Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University in Warsaw)
Presentation Format: Oral
Exploitation of flint raw materials is an indispensable and integral part of research into the manifestations of intergroup contacts
of the Stone Age societies. This initial element of the chain operatoir takes on special significance in Neolithic and Chalcolithic
when artefacts from specific raw materials spreaded several hundred kilometers from the original deposit. Around 4200 - 3600
BC, the Lublin-Volynian culture societies appeared in southern and central Poland. These were the southern societies with a specific, separated material culture, which advanced blade technology was main element. These communities were accustomed to
very good and easily available flint raw materials from Volyn (modern Ukraine), characterized by large size of nodules. Different
situation is in Poland. Despite the rich deposits of flint, it occur relatively deep underground in the bed rocks - limestone and
chalk. For this reason, none of the known flint mines from Poland had been identified as the the Lublin-Volyn culture sites. This
state of research changed in 2013 when the “Przyjaźń” site was identified for the first time with the materials analogous to
those known from the settlement sites of these communities. The ALS and geophysical research carried out last year made it
possible to identify the site as flint mine. This mine is located outside the geological occurrence of chocolate flints (Upper Jura),
in a redeposited clay deposit. The material found at the site is very homogenous. It seems that it was used only episodically,
during Chalcolithic period. It is a great rarity in the case of chocolate flint which were used from the Paleolithic to the Early Iron
Age. It seems that representatives of the Lublin-Volyn culture specialized in flintknapping came to the Polish territory with new
knowledge about the ways of location and exploitation of subsurface flint deposits.
