TREE, WHEAT, HUMAN? TREE RINGS AS PROXIES FOR PREHISTORIC ECONOMIC SUCCESS
Author(s): Hinz, Martin (Institut für Archäologische Wissenschaften Uni Bern) - Bleicher, Niels (Unterwasserarchäologie und
Labor für Dendrochronologie, Amt für Städtebau, Stadt Zürich)
Presentation Format: Oral
It is well known that climate is not static and has changed in various degrees over the Holocene. It is also well established that
plants, such as trees, but also crops, have reacted to certain climate changes. Influences on human societies are mediated
through for example, poor harvests, which are not least triggered by negative climatic conditions. If we want to investigate the
local effects of climatic changes on economic processes, what could be more obvious than to use the trees for this purpose,
which were exposed to the same conditions? After all, the analysis of tree ring data forms the backbone of paleoclimatological
assessments.
But are climate proxies like tree rings suitable gauges for economic success and viable indicators for an important source of
social stress? And if so – on which spatial and temporal scale and for which societies? A simple transfer of tree rings to cereal
harvests is not possible. Different species on given soils react differently to a variety of weather-parameters at different times
of the year. In addition, archaeologically obtained tree ring curves are often of a significantly different quality (e.g. shorter) than
those explicitly obtained for the purpose of climate reconstruction.
We evaluate published and new, unpublished studies on the problem of reconstructing cereal harvests from tree rings in different regions and epochs. We present inspiring approaches and some failed attempts and possible pitfalls. Important aspects
are found in the phenomena of signal stability and microregional differences. We want to highlight new methodological developments in the utilization of tree ring data for ecological-economic reconstruction and discuss the possibilities with case studies.
