A CHILDHOOD CUT SHORT?: A BIOARCHAEOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF JUVENILE DECAPITATION BURIALS
IN LATE WESTERN ROMAN BRITAIN
Author(s): Christie, Shaheen (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeological investigations of Romano-British burials have revealed diverse forms of normative and non-normative burial
treatments and attitudes toward the dead. Decapitation burials are perhaps the most common form of differential burial with
interpretations ranging from infanticide, execution, trophy taking, fear of the dead, and veneration. Interestingly, large scale
studies have found evidence for decapitation of individuals of all ages, sex, origin, health, stature, etc. making it difficult to determine in most cases a contextual explanation for the application of the rite. Bioarchaeological analysis of Late Roman Period
(3rd – 5th cent. A.D.) decapitation burials in central and southern Britain revealed a continuation of Late Iron Age (100 B.C. – A.D.
43) fragmentation rites, namely intentional breaking and scattering of human or animal remains in burials or deposits. Interpretations for those burials suggest decapitation burials of both adults and juveniles were part of a sub-class of mortuary treatment
in the region used to mark communal membership rather than a deviant identity of the dead. However, was this also the case in
the western region of the country? This project will use mortuary and bioarchaeological data from eight juvenile decapitation burials in Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire in western Britain and compare those data to: 1) decapitated adults in the same sites, 2)
non-decapitated population in the same sites, and, 3) decapitated juveniles in central and southern Britain in order to determine
if those funerary rituals are structurally different or similar in specific contexts. It is hoped by utilizing a systemic approach to
this analysis that the results will reveal whether there is evidence to suggest communities utilized specialized mortuary rituals
toward decapitated juveniles, whether those practices may be classified as normative, atypical, or deviant, and whether juvenile
bodies were used as objects to culturally construct expressions of communal identity in Late Roman society.
