ALWAYS ON THE MOVE AND NOT PERCEIVED – ON THE TRACE OF ITINERANT CRAFTSMEN IN THE IRON
AGE
Author(s): Winkler, Alexandra (University of Zurich)
Presentation Format: Oral
In the literature Iron Age craft seems difficult to separate from the concept of specialisation. Production units concentrated in
a unique place are identified by high quantities of production waste. For the settlement with small quantities of craft waste, we
find the craft activity mentioned and classified as occasionally. If the settlement on its own is not identified as crafts, the remains are often not of interest anymore. However, the circumstances of these occasional craft activities should be researched.
Which kind of activity produces this type of waste? Does this activity need a specific know-how? Which social group is involved
in the production of this kind of waste?
These questions can’t be answered certainly for all kinds of crafts. The mentioned procedure can be observed preferably with
the metal craft. The metal craft needs a certain know-how, particular tools as well as specific raw material. Also the good conservation of the remains (wroughts slags, cast drops) enable the research about the itinerant craftsmen.
Is it possible to identify archeologically the existence of the itinerant craftsmen? What kind of remains and which methods are
available for the archaeologist? On the base of tool finds, craft waste and their context we have the possibility to determine the
existence of itinerant craftsmen. Subject of the consideration are secondary settlements as well as some central settlements
of the Hallstatt period. Form and style of certain objects give us information concerning the mobility of ideas, innovation and
human beings. The results of the archaeology can be supported by ethnographic examples. Itinerant craftsmen can be found
quite often in ethnographic studies and enable new approaches by analysing them. The aims of the lecture are to investigate the
possible existence of a group of persons not often perceived in the prehistoric archaeology.
