LIVING IN A COMFORTABLE HOUSE: THE DWELLINGS OF OPPEANO
Author(s): Mangani, Claudia (Museo Civico) - Miller, Christopher (Universität Tübingen) - Nicosia, Cristiano - Polisca, Federico
(Università degli Studi di Padova) - Gonzato, Federica (Polo Museale del Veneto)
Presentation Format: Oral
The modern town of Oppeano is located about 20 km south of Verona (NE Italy), in a territory rich in archaeological evidences
dating from the Bronze to the Iron Age. Not far from the previously investigated settlement of Feniletto (dated to Late Bronze
Age, 13th-12th c. BC) a newly discovered site, built with wooden elements, has been found in a portion of floodplain known as
“Bussé”. This new site, named Vallese di Oppeano 4D, was discovered in 2014 during preventive archaeology operations for the
construction of a pipeline crossing a vast area in northern Italy. The settlement, dated to the Middle Bronze Age, was excavated
over an area of 350 square meters, with a trench of 5x70 meters.
Four phases have been identified, each one separated sometimes by gyttja the thickness of which suggests the alternating
sequence of short-lived palustrine and alluvial environments. In Phase 2 the best preserved wooden structures from the original
buildings were found. A sequence of room remains, marked by wood partitions and cooking installations (rebuilt several times)
and associated rake-out deposits were observed.
This paper aims to illustrate the results focused on Buildings F and G of Phase 2a, where micromorphology and dendrochronology
were carried out. In particular, cooking installations have been sampled to determine their function, the technology of construction and the nature of the waste they produced. Their accumulation as rake-out and variously trampled deposits resulted in the
accretion of thick “domestic” sequences within the huts. These are intercalated to frequent reflooring episodes and are perfectly preserved due to waterlogging. These sequences offer therefore a unique opportunity for the reconstruction of activity areas
and firing technology in these MBA buildings.
