KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER BETWEEN MINING COMMUNITIES
Theme: Interpreting the archaeological record: artefacts, humans and landscapes
Organisers: Reitmaier-Naef, Leandra (University of Zurich) - Thomas, Peter (German Mining Museum Bochum) - Hanning, Erica
(Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum Mainz RGZM) - Reschreiter, Hans - Kowarik, Kerstin (Natural History Museum Vienna)
Format: Regular session
Since prehistoric times, the acquisition, exploitation and processing of mineral resources has always been an operation that requires specific technical knowledge. This has led to the development of specialized technological complexes within each mining
region adapted to the local requirements – be it environmental, economic or social in nature. Moreover, due to the geographic
distribution of the exploited raw materials, many mining areas were initially located in the peripheries, but throughout time they
became economic centers and even points of origin for technological innovation.
Exchange processes between mining areas also were likely. The spatial and chronological distribution of characteristic traits
allows to draw conclusions about the presence of contact and trade networks. However, the exact quality and mechanism of
these exchanges is often unclear: was the knowledge spread directly by the physical movement of specialists or more indirectly
through middlemen? Likewise, there are cases where innovations - in spite of their spatial and temporal proximity - were apparently consciously NOT adopted. Thus, mining-related technology does not appear as an isolated occurrence, but as a component
of a meshwork of different factors that regulated the work and life of the mining district.
This session will focus on a chronological and spatially comprehensive discourse of the modularity of technology transfer and
its premises. Focus will be put upon the identification and characterization of knowledge transfer in the archaeological record,
the roll of implicit knowledge in the spread of technological innovation, as well as the discussion of the reasons that help or
hinder the expansion of new technologies. Papers dealing with diverse fields and contexts of raw material will be welcome. This
includes, but is not limited to, archaeological research on mining districts, experimental archaeology, computer-aided modeling,
as well as ethnoarchaeological examples.
