ARCHAEOLOGY OF PLASZOW CONCENTRATION CAMP (KRAKÓW, POLAND): BETWEEN HERITAGE AND
EDUCATION OF MEMORIAL SITE
Author(s): Karski, Kamil (The Historical Museum of Kraków; Institute of Archaeology, Rzeszów University)
Presentation Format: Oral
25 years after the premiere of Steven Spielberg’s ”Schindler’s List”, the debate of Second World War’s heritage and memory in
Kraków is still ongoing. Selected places of the local landscape become more popular among tourists, local residents. The number
of commemoration were prepared by heritage management organizations (like city council, museums, NGOs). Nevertheless, the
area of former Plaszow labor and concentration camp is almost invisible for the locals, whose treat it as a park, place of social and
sports activities without the consciousness of its history.
Since 2016, the area of the Plaszow camp has been the object of comprehensive archaeological research, carried out by The
Museum of of Krakow. The purpose of the field works were documentation and verification of information collected during previous historical research, regarding the localization of mass graves, a topography of the camp and preserved architectural relics.
During the project various methods of non-invasive and invasive research were used, i. e. LIDAR analysis, geophysical (magnetometry method, electrical resistance surveys, GPR; 2016-2017), surface surveys (2017-2018) excavations (2017-2018).
The results of the research were used for the preparation of the scenario of the commemorating of Plaszow’s victims’ history
as a memorial site and museum. The camp’s archaeology become the aim of interest of local residents and were fitted in the
education programme.
In my presentation, I would like to discuss cultural, social and scientific contextes of archaeological research in Plaszow camp,
treated as the dissonant heritage of Kraków’s history. Besides the results of archeological research, I will pay special attention
to the social context of works (presentation, represenations and expectations), as well as a social response to the process of
commemoration and heritage management of local and city’s society.
