ON THE PALEO-CLIMATIC/ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS AND SOCIO-CULTURAL SYSTEM RESILIENCE
ALONG THE HISTORICAL SILK ROAD
Author(s): Yang, Liang (Christian-Albrecht-Univeristät Kiel)
Presentation Format: Oral
There is increasing discussion that climate and environmental factors might have also played a significant role in fostering economic and socio-cultural changes along the Silk Road as well as in a broader area. However, it is also argued that many analyses
over-emphasized the deterministic mechanisms. Societal responses to external forces are nonlinear in nature. Any hypothesized direct linkages between cultural transition and environmental forcing must be treated with caution. Purely environmental
explanations of societal collapse, including climatic explanations, remain less than convincing and are still controversially discussed to make a general conclusion.
This study covers the major contents and results of the newly published book “Socio-Environmental Dynamics along the Historical Silk Road”. It introduces the issue of the links and processes behind climate change, environmental change, and socio-culture
change in a historical perspective in the ancient Silk Road region. Analyses of the changes and development of the socio-environment system in this significant area enhance our understanding on the regular patterns of coupled natural and social evolution, and is thus of important theoretical and practical significance. We argue that the cross-cutting theme has been to reach
beyond simple explanations of environmental or human determinism, but social resilience under environmental impacts. Studies
indicate both that climate conditions significantly influence human socio-cultural systems and that the social-culture systems
are certainly resilient to climate impacts, which is indeed the case at the historical Silk Road areas. We aim to highlight the complexity of the relationships between climatic and socio-cultural changes, and therefore encourage further investigations, for
instance, of the concept of climate resilience that links both the climate impact and social response into one framework.
