THE TEMPLAR CHURCH OF SAN GILLIO ( ITALY): AN ARCHAEOASTRONOMICAL ANALYSIS AND DIGITAL
SURVEY.
Author(s): Motta, Silvia (I.N.A.F. Istituto Nazionale Astrofisica, Astronomical Observatory Milano; Società Astronomica Italiana - SAIt) - Gaspani, Adriano (I.N.A.F. Istituto Nazionale Astrofisica, Astronomical Observatory Milano)
Presentation Format: Poster
San Gillio is located North-West of Turin, in Piedmont. The toponym derives from the Italian version of the French name ,Saint
Gilles, corresponding to the Latin name Egidio, to whom the parish is still consecrated . San Gillio Church was originally a dependency of the Templar priory of Sant’Egidio di Testona (now Moncalieri) and in a document it is mentioned as ”Sancti Aegidij
house-fort”, a squat - walls fort built in 1150.Nowadays you can see only the ancient abandoned church which lies half hidden by
brambles in a clearing on the edge of a thicket.
In one of our previous essays on architectural alignments in many Templar churches, by applying a rigorous methodology, we
pointed out that astronomical reference points had been often set at the horizon so we might state the existence of orientation
patterns used by Templar Knights for designing their churches.
Measurements were collected in summer 2018 in situ by the authors and then an appropriate statistical study was carried out in
order to better understand a distribution function of the aligments and an appropriate archaeoastronomical analysis.
We adopted the most recent techniques belonging to the theory of the Circular Data that is the most suitable ones in the archaeoastronomical data processing. Statistical tests have been applied to prove the confidence level of the results that we
achieved. Furthermore we used a satellite data processing software to analyze Ultra-high resolution satellite images in order to
enablea new paradigm in global exploration. Surveying sub-meter resolution satellite images is one of the most accurate methods to get preliminary information about the possibility of finding out remains of the ancient mansion in the subsoil of the surrounding wood. Developing this study we have claimed to outline the results of archaeoastronomical investigation and digital
survey dealing with this site.
