EXTINCTION OF “SYNANTHROPIC” INSECTS FROM ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONTEXTS: KEY IDENTIFIERS
OF ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES
Author(s): Tuccia, Fabiola - Giordani, Giorgia - Vanin, Stefano (School of Applied Sciences, University of Huddersfield)
Presentation Format: Oral
Archaeoentomology (the study of insect and arthropod remains) provides a means to enhance our understanding of past human
activities, as well as species biodiversity, biogeography, and climatic changes. The purpose of this work is to provide evidence,
using specific examples from archaeological excavations taking place in Sardinia (Italy) in the last decade, on how entomological
records can be interpreted to shed light on global environmental changes.
Our study focussed on the analysis of the entomo-fauna found in association with human remains under the Cathedral of Castelsardo (Sassari). These date from the 17th-19th centuries and include, among other species, the black bottle fly Phormia regina
(Diptera: Calliphoridae). Moreover, thousands of puparia (formed from the cuticle of the third instar larvae, where the metamorphosis occurs) of the sea-weed fly Thoracochaeta zosterae (Diptera: Sphaeroceridae) were found in soil deposits collected from
a medieval well in the city of Sassari. Despite the differences between these two contexts, the entomological findings show
a striking similarity in terms of the unusual character of the species present. There are no modern records of P. regina and T.
zosterae available from Sardinian private or museum collections, as far as we are aware. The extinction of the species could be
potentially caused by the change of the landscape use and by the climate change as the distribution and the seasonality of the
flies are temperature dependent and species-specific. Other reasons for the extinction can be related with changes in the commercial routes of the island with the introduction of competitors or predators/parasitoids. However, the latter hypothesis still
needs further validations. Moreover, it is worth to mention that also modern records concerning forensic entomological cases
support our hypothesis as in the case of Synthesiomyia nudiseta (Diptera: Muscidae) which has only recently found its optimal
developmental conditions in Southern Europe, after being brought by naval commercial routes from China or South America.
