NEOLITHIC FLINT ASSEMBLAGES FROM BULGARIA: THE CHALLENGE OF CAPTURING A TRANSITION
Author(s): Gurova, Maria (National Institute of Archaeology with Museum, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences)
Presentation Format: Oral
The chipped stone assemblages from Bulgaria during the Neolithic pe¬riod (6th millennium BC) reflect the changes and gradual
transition in the Neolithic lifestyle , comprising both – technology and social organisation. Raw material procurement strategy is
one of the most important aspects of the decision-making of prehistoric communities in face of the challenges/constraints of
the environment.
The distribution and use of particular stone raw materials in distinct ‘cultural’ contexts suggest different values embodied in
various raw materials. Thus, the later became a hallmark for community lifestyle and in a broader scale – for intercommunity =
territorial/local and supra-regional relations. A typical example is the Early Neolithic chipped-stone assemblages of the Karanovo
I and II cultural alliance (part of a supra-regional technocomplex in the Balkans) which is recognisable by formal toolkits made of
Balkan flint.
The use of Balkan flint (with several reliably identified outcrops, but without any certain workshop documented!) represents
one of the most distinctive characteristics of these assemblages. During the first half of the 6th millennium BC, the Balkan flint
distribution system was one of two major lithic exchange networks operating in Southeast Europe (together with that of Melian
obsidian from the Aegean). From 5500 BC a significant shift in raw material (particularly Balkan flint) procurement and network
distribution took place. After its fundamentally important role in the Neolithization process and its wide distribution in the Early
Neolithic of Southeast Europe, Balkan flint use and significance declined (most probably during the Karanovo III or III–IV period)
and there appeared chipped stone industries based mainly on local resources and expedient production.
