WORLD CAVE, WORLD TREE, WORLD MOUNTAIN, WORLD HOUSING: MODELS OF ARCHAIC
COSMOLOGIES AND COSMOGONIES TANGIBLE IN OBJECTS, BUILDINGS AND LANDSCAPES
Author(s): Rappenglück, Michael (SEAC)
Presentation Format: Oral
One of the basic concerns of human existence has been the creation of everyday living spaces together with the ability to experience being in extraordinary places. The structure, arrangement and weighting of living spaces, their classification and embedding in the fundamental orders of space and time have been activities that have occupied humankind at least since the Upper
Palaeolithic. These concerns are expressed symbolically, mythically, and ritually in objects, buildings and landscapes. They make
experiences and insights about how “the world works” sensually perceptible. Also, the extension and transformation of “normal”
everyday world structure into other realities (birth, death, otherworldly existence, ecstasy) were thematised. Key components
of archaic cosmologies and cosmogonies, namely, the World Cave, the World Tree, the World Mountain and the World Housing,
repeatedly manifest themselves in symbols, myths, rituals, and archaeological records worldwide. They act as impressive mnemonics, manifest in tangible entities, allowing people to conceptualize their lives in an ordered and domesticated space-time, a
cosmos, and from there to establish a concept of “horizon”, “centre” and “orientation”, i.e., a meaningful structure. The nature of
these models raises questions concerning the whys and wherefores of people and the world since archaic cosmologies and cosmogonies can be understood as holistic, multi-layered models of evolving human ecosystems that help, in symbolic language, to
make the world liveable, but also to transcend it. In general, such models extend beyond the astronomical code, delivering ideas
about the human realm of experience. Systems of power, justice, and social order derive from them. The talk combines astronomical elements in archaic cosmologies and cosmogonies with archaeological and cultural anthropological findings.
