RISING FROM THE ASHES: INVISIBLE ARCHAEOLOGICAL HISTORIES BROUGHT TO LIFE
Author(s): Sebire, Heather (English Heritage)
Presentation Format: Oral
The Society of Antiquaries of London was established as a Learned Society in 1717 and was granted a Royal Charter in 1751 with
the aim of “The encouragement, advancement and furtherance of the study and knowledge of the antiquities and history of this
and other countries.”
The society covers a wide range of disciplines and encourages interdisciplinarity through its library, collections and meetings.
The collections of the Society include over 45,000 artefacts comprising archaeology, numismatics, heraldry, material culture,
fine and decorative arts and objects that illustrate the history of the society itself. The collections are therefore an invaluable
source for the study of the history of the Society of Antiquaries and the role it played in the development of many disciplines
including archaeology.
In the nineteenth century the Society was involved in early recording of archaeological sites including megalithic structures
throughout Britain and elsewhere and commissioned surveys and accounts of these sites for publication. Money was raised
to publish the work through public subscription. However as they were about to go to press there was a catastrophic fire at the
printers and many of the drawings were destroyed. The project lost momentum and was never brought to fruition. The Society
was not prepared at the time to finance further work. Many of the originals of the drawings do survive in various institutions but
still remain invisible to the archaeological record as they have never been published. This paper will address the issue of material
in archaeological collections such as these nineteenth century surveys that have archaeological as well as intrinsic value but
have never been in the public domain. Some of these drawings relate to major sites in British archaeology such as Stonehenge
and Avebury and are therefore very important in the archaeological record.
