BURIAL MOUND PEOPLE: BIOARCHAEOLOGICAL CASE STUDY FROM IRON AGE FOREST-STEPPE OF THE
TRANS-URALS
Author(s): Sharapova, Svetlana (Institute of History and Archaeology, Urals Branch of RAS, Ekaterinburg) - Cherdantsev,
Stepan - Trapezov, Rostislav (Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk) - Pilipenko, Aleksandr (Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences,
Novosibirsk; Institute of Archaeology and Ethnography, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk;
Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk)
Presentation Format: Oral
In following paper, materials of the Sargat culture (500 BC – 300 AD) are presented as staging areas for bioarchaeological
study. Due to its geographical location on the northern periphery of the nomadic world the material culture of the forest-steppe
population shows a very specific distinction. The scholarly consensus is that nomadic impact on the local population was of
great importance so that rising aristocracy formed by nomadic and semi-nomadic clans plays a consolidating role. Archaeological excavations of the Sargat kurgans (burial mounds) evidence various forms of those interactions. At the same time, recent
not-yet-numerous investigations of ancient DNA provide data supporting previously suggested hypothesis about southern influence in formation of the Sargat population. Thus, paper describes case study which is being undertaken for female individual
from Karasie 9 cemetery (Tobol River basin). Archaeological excavation was complemented by field anthropological observation,
which promoted to identify delayed burial practice. Other data such as pottery style, her sparsely furnished grave and intentional
cranial deformation allowed us to consider her as a relatively privileged – and most likely nomadic – member of Sargat society.
In course of on-going ancient DNA analysis there were obtained some data on mitochondrial lineage structure from Karasie 9
female, which will be compared in a context of various groups of the Sargat gene pool as well as within mitochondrial DNA diverse
of Iron Age Eurasian nomads. And last but not least, together with results of paleopathological examination we can study rather
individuals than the population in general. The paper will further show what kind of information is missing and how all aspects in
details increase the scope of archaeological record.
Part of this research is being undertaken within IHA UB RAS theme (No.AAAA-A16-116040110036-1); paleogenetic study was
financed by the Russian Science Foundation (RSCF) grant (project No. 1778-20193) (www.rscf.ru).
