SETTLEMENT DYNAMICS AT HIGHLAND OPEN-AIR PERSISTENT PLACES. THE EVIDENCE FROM
CASERA STAULANZA (VENETIAN DOLOMITES, NORTHERN ITALY)
Author(s): Fontana, Federica - Visentin, Davide (Università di Ferrara) - Bassetti, Michele (CORA Società Archeologica s.r.l.) Bertola, Stefano (Università di Ferrara, Università di Firenze) - Mozzi, Paolo (Università di Padova) - Sangiorgi, Carlo - Soncin,
Alice - Turrini, Maria Chiara (Università di Ferrara)
Presentation Format: Oral
Persistent places are a typical feature of highland territories. Such locations, occupied by human groups several times, in some
cases for centuries or millennia, correspond to areas where favorable topographic and landscape attributes occur simultaneously (flat surfaces, good visibility, water sources etc.). Most frequently this situation has been documented in rock-sheltered
sites representing well recognizable landmarks which have allowed, in most cases, the formation of stratigraphic series of variable thickness in which each layer corresponds to a diverse occupation phase. But what happens when open air locations are
repeatedly settled over time in areas which are usually characterized by low sedimentation rates? In this paper this aspect will
be discussed taking as a case study the open-air site of Casera Staulanza in the Venetian Dolomites (Northern Italy). This site is
located on a flat ledge next to a moraine ridge and close to a major pass, at an altitude of 1681 m a.s.l. The stratigraphic sequence
allowed recognizing two main pedogenetic phases: a Lateglacial one and the present soil, both heavily affected by bioturbation.
Archaeological investigations carried out over an area of about 30 m2 have allowed recovering a rich lithic assemblage from the
two soils, along with several charcoal fragments. Some archeological features were also identified. While the analysis of the
lithic assemblage indicates a main Late Palaeolithic occupation, radiocarbon dates carried out on charcoal samples refer to Early
Mesolithic, Copper Age and Medieval times. In order to test the possibility of identifying different occupation phases and locating them in space, a multidisciplinary study has been carried out including the analysis of the provenance of lithic raw materials,
a techno-economic and functional study of the lithic assemblages and a spatial distribution with GIS of all the recovered items.
