BASKETS MADE OF CLAY – DECORATED NEOLITHIC POTTERY IN ANATOLIA, THE LEVANT, AND
MESOPOTAMIA AROUND 6000 BC
Author(s): Franz, Ingmar (ArchaeoBW)
Presentation Format: Oral
Around 6000 BC there is a massive increase in the manufacture of mostly decorated pottery at Çatalhöyük West Mound observable, which is illustrated by estimated 50 times more pottery in these settlement remains then on the ancestral Çatalhöyük East
Mound. The pottery assemblage from the West Mound is dominated by light colored serving and storage vessels painted with
red geometric decoration patterns resembling basketry decoration, although sometimes incised decorations and appliqués are
also observable. In general, the vessels show a wider range of shapes and sizes than the vessels from the East Mound. Analyses
showed that stylistic and technological characteristics related to basketry technology are typical for the West Mound pottery
assemblage. Therefore, it seems likely that, it represents a basketry-imitating blooming stage of Neolithic pottery manufacturing traditions. This introduction of “baskets made of clay” could also have had an impact on the manufacture of basket containers over time, most likely they replaced them. This would perfectly explain the much larger quantities of pottery at Çatalhöyük
between 6 000 – 5 800 BC compared to earlier phases. Based on conceptual, stylistic, and technological characteristics this
decorated Central Anatolian Neolithic pottery shares many similarities and parallels with contemporary assemblages in Anatolia,
the Levant and in Mesopotamia. In fact, it is very likely that many of them are part of the phenomenon observed at Çatalhöyük:
Pottery is imitating basketry, and the increasing pottery quantities and the increasing diversity indicate a shift away from organic basketry containers to mineral basketry-looking vessels, roughly between 6200 and 5800 BC. It seems, that the different
pottery styles are following their local, already centuries-old basketry traditions, and show us the high diversity of Neolithic
basketry in the region.
