‘MINOR’ CERAMIC-ARTIFACTS IN THE NORTHERN TYRRHENIAN AREAS (LIGURIA, CORSICA). DATA
FROM THE SECOND IRON AGE UP TO THE ROMAN PERIOD
Author(s): Piccardi, Eliana (MIUR-Italian Ministry of Instruction, University, Research. Teacher of Humanities at the Secondary
State School; Independent researcher)
Presentation Format: Poster
Beyond the major vessels productions, an investigative light will be shed on the scattered universe of all those ceramic artifacts
(e.g. bricks, tiles, domestic objects related to textile practices and so on) sometimes appeared as ‘minor’ evidence within the
material culture of the ancient sites.
The first emerging datum is the atomization of their producing centers, just occasionally enlightened by archaeometric analyses.
Beyond some better known building materials of the Roman period (especially the rare stamped ones of the Empire centuries),
their production and circulation in the considered Northern Tyrrhenian areas has been very seldom matter of summarizing investigation.
These objects have already been considered as sign of the Roman know-how arrival in the ‘underdeveloped’ native societies,
although well dated assemblages are still rare. Besides, formerly considered ‘local’ productions may sometimes reveal, instead,
a certain circulation of these material, too, at least in a sub-regional scale.
Similar interpretative issues may also affect domestic tools like e.g. whorls and spinning loads, or also other kinds of artifacts like
the so called ‘phocula’, ceramic ‘rings’ of some Liguria sites.
These ceramic artifacts considered between the Second Iron Age and the Roman Period, although rather heterogeneous in their
whole, on one side may appear crucial to define the cultural status of the communities and their achieved acculturation degree,
beyond their identity. On the other hand, domestic lesser ceramic objects, within the native ancient communities of Liguria and
Corsica also along their Romanization process, may be assumed as a clue of the persistence in their material culture.
This preliminary collection of evidence aims therefore to furnish a ‘state of the art’ about these ceramic materials in their various
contexts, as a base of knowledge for coming sceneries of data and interpretations, hopefully with a wider support of archaeometric analyses within an overall view.
