MEDIEVAL CISTERCIAN CHURCHES IN ITALY AND SWITZERLAND: ORIENTATION – LIGHT INCIDENCE –
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS – METHODOLOGY
Author(s): Spinazzè, Eva (University of Ca’ Foscari Venice)
Presentation Format: Oral
Ten Cistercian complexes situated in Northern Italy and Switzerland will be discussed by the author (archaeologist and historian) regarding their orientation, light incidence and the methodology used. On each sacred building an accurate georeferenced
survey during fieldwork with astronomical calculations was carried out, the information crosschecked with primary, secondary
sources and comparative analyses performed. The hydrogeological factors, morphology of the environment and the local horizon
were considered. Cistercian churches situated in flat land (five in Italy) and in mountain environment (five in Switzerland) were
compared. These results were measured up with the data of the over 220 medieval churches studied in the last 12 years by the
author (with the same method).
It is an interdisciplinary research which interweaves architecture, archaeology, topography, history, liturgy and astronomy. The
plants, reports of archaeological excavations are fundamental to compare the alignment of probable prior fundaments under the
existing ones.
The aim of this research is to understand the disposition of the original and successive churches into space and whether the
rules dictated by the tradition of observing the Sun (associated to Christ) or Moon (to the Virgin Mary) in Medieval Ages were also
applied to a sacred building beyond the Alps in mountain setting where their rising and setting are more difficult so see.
The results here obtained are of most importance for the history of architecture and liturgy, as they show in all ten cases a
precise alignment – a liaison with the sky – toward the setting or rising Sun on liturgical feast days, mainly toward the two Mary
main feasts celebrated during the Middle Ages: Annunciation, March 25th and Assumption, August 15th, both for the position in
the flat land and in mountain setting. Moreover, these results reinforce the data obtained by the author for the other 220 sacred
buildings.
