SOCIAL STRATIFICATION AND THE TIME OF SURVIVAL IN THE LUSATIAN CULTURE. THE CASE OF THE
CEMETERY FROM WICINA (POLAND)
Author(s): Liczbinska, Grazyna (Institute of Anthropology, Faculty of Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań) - Baron,
Justyna (Institute of Archeology, University of Wrocław) - Piontek, Janusz (Institute of Anthropology, Faculty of Biology, Adam
Mickiewicz University in Poznań)
Presentation Format: Oral
Social stratification might have been reflected in a selection of grave goods and time-consuming preparation of grave pits. In
this presentation, minimal number of vessel per grave (MNVs) and presence of a chamber (reflected in vessel arrangement;
PCh) were treated as a proxy for social stratification. We tested the hypothesis that the indices describing differences in social
structure could differentiate the time of survival of individuals from different age classes in the Lusatian Culture. The cremated
human remains excavated from the urnfield at Wicina, were used for this study. For 438 individuals age at death was determined.
The Kaplan-Meier method and Cox proportional hazard were applied. The survival analysis confirmed statistically significant differences in probability of survival between individuals according to social stratification determinants. The probability of survival
was higher in the group with greater MNVs (≥10) than in the group with MNVs<10. Over 80% individuals from the group with
MNVs≥10 reached the age of 15. Over 60% of individuals from MNVs<10 died before the onset of reproduction. To age 40
years survived over 30–40% of individuals from grave chambers with MNVs≥10, and 10% reached the end of reproduction. In
the group with MNVs<10 the same fractions were as half as many. The Chi-squared test showed that the frequency of MNVs
depended on individual’s age at death. The greater MNVs (≥10) occurred more frequently in adults (70– 80%) than in the groups
of children (aged ≤15). The differences in the times of survival were also statistically significant in favour of the PCh’s group. The
Cox proportional hazard confirmed that MNVs was significantly related with the time of survival. With some interpretive caution,
it can be concluded, that social stratification, analysed by MNVs and PCh indicators, in the community of the Lusatian Culture,
could be reflected in the time of survival.
