PUNIC BLACK GLAZED POTTERY FROM SARDINIA: A IMITATION CLASS BETWEEN PUNIC AND ROMAN
PERIODS
Author(s): Del Vais, Carla (Università di Cagliari)
Presentation Format: Oral
Punic black glazed pottery is one of the most widespread imitation classes in Sardinia; it’s mostly documented during the 3rd
sec. B.C. in all areas controlled by the Carthaginians, but it continues to be produced in the Roman age until the early decades of
the 2nd century BC.
This pottery is characterized by clay body generally not well purified and rich in temper, of variable color, more often grey, beige,
brownish or orange. The glaze is not uniform and varies from black to gray, from brown to reddish; it is applied by immersion inside
and on the upper part of the external surface. The most common forms are derived from Attic black-glazed pottery, but in the
later stages of production forms derived from Campanian classes appear. the production ends with the arrival in the island of
large quantities of pottery from Campania (classes A and B) which saturate the market with better quality products.
Sardinian production is portion of a more general phenomenon of Mediterranean Punic culture that is part of a very large geographical area that affects, in addition to Sardinia, North Africa, the Iberian Peninsula and only episodically Sicily. The beginning of
this phenomenon is linked to the disappearance in the central-western Mediterranean at the end of the 4th century of massive
imports of Attic ceramics, which replaces in the local market.
These ceramics show variable macroscopic features and at the same time common to the different diffusion areas. The archaeological investigations suggest that they are mostly local productions, connected to the common ceramic factories, but some
analyzes carried out on Sardinian pottery have shown a much more complex situation related to import phenomena from North
Africa. It is evident that a macroscopic analysis alone can not be enough to identify the different productions.
