SLAYING A VAMPIRE WITH SCIENCE- ANALYSIS OF THE SKELETAL REMAINS FROM KAMIEŃ POMORSKI
Author(s): Drath, Joanna - Arciszewska, Joanna - Szargut, Maria (Pomeranian Medical University) - Machalski, Grzegorz - Holicki, Mariusz (West Pomeranian Oncology Center) - Kurka, Grzegorz (The Museum of History of Kamień Pomorski Land) - Parafiniuk, Mirosław - Ossowski, Andrzej (Pomeranian Medical University)
Presentation Format: Oral
In July 2014 in a small city of Kamień Pomorski in north-west Poland, a skeleton was found during archeological digging on the
grounds of a medieval cemetery. That particular skeleton drew attention of the scientists as it was buried outside of the cemetery land. Moreover it manifested peculiar lesions on left leg bones in a form of drilled holes. The international press reported that
finding as another vampire burial and initial anthropological analysis conducted by a cultural anthropologist stated that remains
belonged to a young male, whose appearance caused fear among his community, resulting in postmortem anti-vampire body
treatment. Lately an interdisciplinary team of scientists from Pomeranian Medical University in Stettin, undertook a thorough examination of the “vampire’s” bones. In our research macroscopical, molecular and radiological methods were applied. Our results
showed that the skeleton belongs to a female, age over 60 years at the time of death. She was of a European biogeographical
origin, belonging to a haplogroup H. The traumatic circular lesions on her left leg bones were done when a woman was still alive,
shortly before her demise. There are slight signs of healing on the bones, as well as osteomyelitis formation visible on CT scan
images. The radiocarbon dating places the remains in between seventeenth and eighteenth century. Considering all our results,
we reject the “vampire” theory as the explanation of the skeleton’s history. Furthermore, we raise an alternative hypothesis that
the skeletal remains could belong to a witch-hunt victim who had been tortured before her death.
