OCCUPIED SPACES, EXPLOITED SPACES. THE EXAMPLE OF THE MONUMENTAL ENCLOSURE FROM LA
VILLENEUVE-AU-CHATELOT, FRANCE
Author(s): Poirier, Sandy (Eveha) - Tegel, Willy (Freiburg University) - Donnart, Klet (Eveha) - Ferrier, Antoine (Conseil Général
de l’Aisne) - Ravry, Delphine (Eveha)
Presentation Format: Oral
725 linear meters of a monumental neolithic palisade have been fully excavated. It is distinguished by the exceptional conservation of organic materials (450 wooden planks) and the presence of more than 1600 sandstone grinding stone fragments.
These two artifact classes document the exploitation of forest resources as well as the woodworking techniques used in the
production of the palisade.. Primary forest Oak trees were selected for their quality, split into large planks, wich were then arranged contiguously to make the palisade. The shaping of planks is sometimes relatively elaborate, with notches of various
types at their base providing insight into how they were put into place. From the degree of trunk debitage, the initial diameter of
the trees can be reconstructed to obtain information on both the type of stand and the exploitation of the forests.
Indeed, traces of adze and axes have sometimes been discovered (100 on the same piece of wood). Perforations, notches, stirrups, a tenon are part of the traces of tools visible on the worked wood of the palisade.
Extensive dendrochronological dating confirms the contemporaneity of the different segments of the palisade, with its erection
beginning in 3232 BC. The study of the sandstone artefacts used to block the planks provides information on the nature of the
substrates exploited, but is also one of thee particularities of the enclosure itself.
Among these blocks are many macro-tools, particularly millstones.
The blocks were collected from secondary deposits, after being exposed in the alluvial plain of the Seine, as confirmed by the
presence of fluvial polishing and carbonate concretions prior to their use. The origin of all these anthropised blocks, remains an
enigma. In any case, the discovery of these building materials draw us the outline of the exploitation and logistic strategies set
up to build this Neolithic enclosure.
