AGRICULTURAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE IN IRON AGE IRELAND
Author(s): McClatchie, Meriel (University College Dublin) - Dillon, Mary (Independent) - Becker, Katharina - Gearey, Ben (University College Cork) - Armit, Ian (University of Leicester) - Eogan, James (Transport Infrastructure Ireland) - Fioccoprile, Emily
(University of Bradford) - Hegarty, Susan (Dublin City University) - Hull, Graham (TVAS Ireland Ltd) - OCarroll, Ellen (Independent)
Presentation Format: Oral
Agriculture in northern Europe during the Bronze Age is often considered to have provided a strong basis for economic growth
and emerging social power. In Ireland, there is extensive archaeological evidence for farming during the Late Bronze Age (1200–
700 BC). Significant changes in environments and societal organisation then occurred, affecting what and how people were
farming. Evidence for farming is rather difficult to detect during the Early Iron Age (700–400 BC), coinciding with a time of climate
change. This may reflect dramatic collapses in societal organisation and crises in food-management strategies, or more simply
reorganisation of food systems. By the time of the Developed Iron Age (400 BC–AD 1), evidence for farming is more easily recognisable in the archaeological record, coinciding with the beginning of so-called Celtic migrations. Detailed research has been
undertaken in recent years on the timing and nature of environmental change during these centuries, particularly in relation to
climate. A detailed understanding of farming practices is, however, less well developed. Extensive archaeobotanical data from
excavations have become available over the past two decades. Despite this availability of data and the recognised importance
of changing farming practices during the Iron Age, detailed analysis of what was being farmed, and how farming was undertaken,
is often absent from archaeology narratives. To address this issue, an INSTAR-funded research project was established, “Settlement and Landscape in Later Prehistoric Ireland – Seeing beyond the site”, which aims to contextualise the archaeology of
Late Bronze Age and Iron Age Ireland within its contemporary prehistoric landscape, focusing on farming strategies and broader
landscape interactions. This paper will reveal how collation and analysis of archaeobotanical data has enabled new insights into
farming practices in Iron Age Ireland.
