INTRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF CULTIVATED AND WILD PLANTS IN EUROPE FROM 8000 – 800 BCE BASED ON LINGUISTICS AND ARCHAEOBOTANY
Author(s): van Amerongen, Yvonne (Leiden University Centre for Linguistics; Archol - Archaeological Research Leiden) - Kroonen, Guus (Leiden University Centre for Linguistics; Department of Nordic Studies and Linguistics, University of Copenhagen)
Presentation Format: Oral
Europe has been populated by different groups of people since the Upper Palaeolithic, presumably starting with a hunter-gatherer lifestyle. At ca. 8000 BCE, the agricultural spread from Anatolia into Europe has provoked many changes in subsistence,
interaction and diet: the so-called Neolithic Revolution. At ca. 3500 BCE, a new wave of people and innovations entered Europe
from the east, introducing pastoral nomadism, new plant and animal species, and a language that can be reconstructed based on
historical-comparative linguistics (i.e. Proto-Indo-European).
The arrival of new people among the existing (cultural) groups of Europe was profound and impacted all areas of prehistoric life.
Dating these changes requires analysis of the evidence from comparative historical linguistics combined with archaeology.
With this paper we want to introduce and discuss historical linguistics as a tool in combination with palaeoethnobotany to create
a more complete and detailed understanding of mobility, subsistence, and diet in the past. We will show sequences of maps,
based on hundreds of archaeological sites, that follow the distribution of cultivated and wild plants throughout European prehistory, as well as their names within the different language groups. Furthermore, specific plant taxa will be highlighted in relation to
the subsistence of hunter-gatherers, farmers, and pastoral nomads to identify their use by these groups.
The discussed data will form the basis for a future international online database that can be used to create overviews of the
distribution of plants, animals, people, and language throughout European prehistory.
