THE ROYAL CRYPT AT PRAGUE CASTLE – TEXTILES RELICS OF CZECH RULERS AND THEIR FAMILY
MEMBERS
Author(s): Brezinova, Helena - Bravermanova, Milena (Institute of Archaeology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague)
Presentation Format: Oral
The unique collection of medieval and Renaissance archaeological textiles and other objects from Prague Castle is a highly important source for knowledge of the material culture of the highest social class of this time.
A large number of these items made up the furnishings of coffins of the Luxembourg and Habsburg dynasty members buried in
the royal crypt in St. Vitus Cathedral built by Bohemian King and Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV around 1350. Two hundred years
later, during the rule of Emperor Maximilian, the crypt was moved several meters further west and a mausoleum was constructed
above it. Charles IV (†1378), his four wives, his sons John from Görlitz (†1396) and Bohemian King Wenceslas IV (†1419), later
Bohemian kings Ladislaus the Posthumous (†1457) and George of Poděbrady (†1471) were buried in the lower part of the crypt.
Habsburg rulers – Ferdinand I (†1564), his wife Anna Jagellonica (†1547) and Maximilian II (†1576) – were buried in the upper part,
the remains of Maximilian’s daughter (†1580) and Rudolf II (†1612) again in the lower part. The crypt was opened several times
over the centuries and coffins were also exchanged.
All funerary equipment was removed by a large-scale reconstruction of the crypt in 1928, after which they become part of the
Prague Castle collection. The objects have recently been restored and their detailed research is currently being finalised. Most
of them are deposited in the depository and are partially displayed in a permanent or short-term exhibition.
Since the collection dates back to 1928, contemporary scientists do not have to deal with the ethical problem of disturbing the
final resting place of historical figures. However, it is clear that crypts should be opened when required by their technical condition not to cause a sensation.
Supported by the project GACR 19-00166S.
