IS IT A MATCH? RELIGIOUS RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ISLAND OF EUBOEA AND THE CHALCIDICE
(NORTHERN AEGEAN) RECONSIDERED
Author(s): Denk, Olivia (University of Basel)
Presentation Format: Oral
Within the produced discourse of the Euboean presence and the leading role of Eretria in the early ‘colonisation’ of the Mediterranean, religious elements were often used as markers to confirm the movement of Euboean cults abroad. Especially in the case
of Chalcidice, which represents from the heterogeneous micro-regions of Northern Greece the zone with the strongest southern
Greek influence, several cults appealed to correspond with the ones from Euboea. These claimed matches served i.a. as basis
to create a colonial perception of Euboeans, who expanded as pioneers of maritime travel their religious traditions into Northern
Greece.
The paper aims to present a comparative approach of the religious landscape of Euboea and the sacred topography of the Chalcidian peninsula, based on new results of my doctoral thesis. In the context of the colonial conception of Chalcidice, I follow
modern scholar’s critical point of view, to provide an updated perspective on the diffusion of Euboean influences in the Protogeometric and Archaic Period, which helps us to identify the provenance of the cults. Taking several cult places of Euboea and of
Chalcidice into account, their religious relations will be contrasted based on literary, epigraphic, numismatic and archaeological
sources. Various features like the worshiped deities, a specific epithet of a god or architectural elements of a sanctuary function as potential clues to recognize relations between both regions. Concerning the Euboean seafaring in connection with the
suggested sea routes to the Northern Aegean, the maritime character of Poseidon as well as the placement of his sanctuaries
on Euboea (e.g. Geraistos), will be discussed in comparison with the sanctuary of Poseidi on the Chalcidice. To shed new light on
the genesis of religious landscapes the cults of Stageira, Ouranopolis and Akanthos need to be analysed within the historical
background of Chalcis and its relations to Andros.
