PREHISTORIC OBSIDIAN USE ON THE NORTHERN TYRRHENIAN ISLANDS, ITALY
Author(s): Tykot, Robert - Vianello, Andrea (University of South Florida)
Presentation Format: Oral
Obsidian formed during volcanic eruptions on several islands in the central Mediterranean and was acquired and distributed to
small islands in the northern Tyrrhenian Sea starting in the Early Neolithic. While there are no archaeological remains of seafaring
vessels for the Neolithic, it appears small islands were inserted in a complex exchange network as stepping stones along lengthy
distribution and trade routes. Surveys and excavations have revealed obsidian artifacts on four islands: Pianosa, Giglio, Giannutri, and Capraia. Previous analyses on 14 artifacts from La Scola on Pianosa, and on 63 obsidian artifacts from Giglio indicated
that three subsources in the Monte Arci complex of Sardinian were being utilized. A later study at the University of Calabria on
241 obsidian artifacts from Cala Giovanna and 28 from La Scola indicated the use of sources on Lipari and Palmarola, as well as
Sardinia.
In this study, a non-destructive, portable X-ray fluorescence spectrometer was used to analyze trace elements on 118 artifacts from Capraia and Giannutri, and to retest 231 from Cala Giovanna. Results were calibrated using a widely-shared set of
40 obsidian standards, and assigned to sources and subsources by direct comparison with a large set of geological samples
from the central Mediterranean sources analyzed with the same pXRF. These analyses verified the earlier studies and produce a
combined dataset for all four islands.
As part of a large research project on Neolithic obsidian trade in the central Mediterranean, and compared with the representation of different sources and changes in their distribution over time, it has become possible to evaluate the dynamics of maritime exchange across the Tyrrhenian. Our study is uncovering increasingly sophisticated socioeconomic patterns in the Italian
Neolithic. Areas previously considered marginal with remote geographic locations are revealed as deeply entangled to leading
cultural and economic centers of the time.
