THE ROLE OF ROCK-CUT ARCHITECTURE IN THE SHAPING OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL LANDSCAPES OF
CENTRAL SICILY
Author(s): Giannitrapani, Enrico (Arkeos - Servizi integrati per i Beni Culturali s.c.)
Presentation Format: Oral
Rock-cut architecture is a key constitutive element of present-day archaeological landscape of central Sicily. The inner part of
the island, in fact, is characterized by the diffused presence of steep limestone, sandstone and flysch outcrops, widely distributed in the territory: because of their geomorphological structure, almost all these outcrops have been easily modified by human
intervention. From prehistory up to last century, a simple technology has been employed to excavate these rocks, producing in
this way a vast heritage of “negative” architectures, used as prehistoric burials, but also, in the following periods, as defense or
cult places, for crafts and agricultural production or as housing structures. Besides being important territorial markers in the
countryside, many modern urban centres of the region have been developed around, or above, some of the most impressive rockcut structures. In the paper, a general outline of the long-term development of rock-cut architecture will be presented, together
with considerations about its role in the making of the cultural, ritual and economic aspects composing the different landscapes
of central Sicily. This analysis is partly hindered by the difficulty to date these structures. Because the long use, and re-use, of
these artificial cavities, often they are found, in fact, without any clear evidence of their original deposits. Furthermore, the technology used for their excavation is very conservative through the centuries, with only the more recent ones which are identifiable
for the use of metal tools: in order to recognize, catalogue and date the numerous examples present in central Sicily it is necessary to apply a contextual and historical analysis of the different societies who produced and used these rock-cut structures.
The paper will conclude with some key examples how such an important historical heritage is used today by local communities
and archaeologists for sensible projects of public archaeology.
