FROM THE LATENIZED OKSYWIE CULTURE TO THE ROMANIZED WIELBARK CULTURE. OUTLINE OF
CULTURAL CHANGES IN POMERANIA (NORTH POLAND)
Author(s): Chrupek, Sebastian (Institute of Archeology Warsaw University - Warsaw)
Presentation Format: Oral
This presentation covers an issue of cultural transformations that has occurred at the end of the 1st century BC (end of the
Pre-roman period) in Pomerania, occupied by population of the Oksywie culture at the time. Their culture is characterized by burial
funeral rite, varieties of weapons and “love” for iron. Evolutionary transformations which took place in the last 50 years of the
first century BC on the southern coast of Baltic Sea, led to development of the Wielbark Culture at the 1st century AD (Roman
period). Typical traits of this culture are biritual funeral rite, a multitude elements of outfit made with non-ferrous metals, and lack
of weapons which is connected with “iron taboo”. Cultural contrast between the Pre-roman and Roman period had been noticed
at the beginning of the 20th century and was interpreted as a result of migration of the Goths tribe. Furthermore, the materials of
both cultures at the same cemeteries were explained by the respect of new arrivals to their predecessors, formerly connected
with Burgunds. This theory was undermined by Dr. Ryszard Wołagiewicz in 1965. He marked a chronological transitional phase
for one of the Oksywie-Wielbark necropolis, emphasizing the evolutionary character of changes and the importance of the local
substrate in shaping the Wielbark culture. This cultural change is also part of the wider issue of civilizational changes that took
place in the Barbaricum, when at the turn of the era Celtic influences were undergoing crisis and the interactions from the Roman
Empire were intesifying. Presenting the analysis of three cemeteries from the pool of several dozen Oksywie-Wielbark necropoles, the author attempts to understand a serious cultural change on the southern coasts of the Baltic Sea at the turn of the era,
which will be necessary for his further research at the PhD dissertation level.
