WHEN MEN AND MOUNTAINS MEET. THE INNER ALPINE LANDSCAPE KLEINWALSERTAL AND ITS
USAGE DURING THE MESOLITHIC
Author(s): Posch, Caroline (Department of Archaeologies, University of Innsbruck)
Presentation Format: Oral
The region Kleinwalsertal features one of the largest concentration of Mesolithic find spots in the province of Vorarlberg (Austria). The sites consist mostly of superficial flint scatters located between 1200 and 2100 m a. s. l. within different habitats and
vegetation zones. Their discovery during the last 30 years can be credited to various local collectors and research groups. Since
2016, the sites are the subject of the author’s doctoral project “The Kleinwalsertal. A Mesolithic landscape with far reaching
contacts”, funded by a DOC-scholarship of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (ÖAW).
The northern Austrian Alps form a bridge between the Mesolithic of Southern Germany and Northern Italy. We know of contacts
between the regions, but we know little about the chronology and the ways in which these “borderlands” were occupied. The
project therefore seeks to generate basic and comparative data regarding these questions in particular and the Mesolithic of
Western Austria in general.
The archaeological sites, and their relationship with and the usage of the surrounding landscape form its key objective. They
are not simply dots on a map, but part of the landscape, intertwined with its possibilities and limitations. To get as complete a
picture as possible, the sites and their artefacts are studied in a holistic approach. It includes an examination of the morphological position of the sites within the landscape via field surveys and subsequent GIS-analysis. Furthermore, an intra site analysis
concerning the excavated sites Schneiderküren, Egg-Schwarzwasser and Bäramähder is conducted. The lithic artefacts are analysed with regard to their technological and typological characteristics, as well as raw material provenance. The synthesis of
the data will deal with questions concerning the function of the sites, the landscape usage and mobility patterns throughout the
Mesolithic in the region and to areas farther abroad.
