CROSSING PEAKS AND VALLEYS: MOBILITY AND SETTLEMENT PATTERNS IN THE APENNINES
(MOLISE, ITALY) DURING THE BRONZE AGE (2ND MILLENNIUM BC)
Author(s): Lucci, Enrico - Mironti, Vittorio - Modesto, Rachele - Cazzella, Alberto (Sapienza - Università di Roma, Dipartimento
di Scienze dell’Antichità)
Presentation Format: Oral
Inland areas of central-southern Italy preserve an incredible cultural palimpsest, ranging from Paleolithic sites to traditional pastoral structures. In fact, until the mid of the last century transhumant pastoralism represented a significant resource for the local communities’ economy, influencing social and cultural aspects. The high mobility associated to this practice is testified by a
dense and wide network of communication routes that connect mountainous areas to inland and coastal plains. The importance
of pastoralism for the Bronze Age economy is well known, hence, the spread of models of material culture in that period could
reflect an accentuated dynamism also for the communities of the 2nd millennium BC.
Starting from 2015, the Molise Survey Project has focused on the human exploitation of mountainous inland areas of the central-southern Adriatic Italy over the prehistoric periods. A remarkable number of sites, scattered across the whole researched
area, has been recognized that mostly belongs to the 2nd millennium BC. Bronze Age sites are mostly located along ancient communication routes and/or in strategic high-altitude grazing land. They have yielded a huge number of diagnostic pottery sherds
linked to production, transformation and consumption of primary goods.
In this presentation we will propose an integrated analysis of the 2nd millennium BC settlement pattern and the historic evidences linked to transhumant pastoralism, with a focus on the relationship between the Bronze Age sites and the communication
network represented by the “tratturi”. By means of GIS elaboration we will try to understand patterns of mobility across inland
areas during the 2nd millennium BC, challenging the traditional model of mobility based exclusively on the large valleys connecting the coastal area to the inland.
