WARRIOR IDENTITIES AND EARLY NORDIC BRONZE AGE DOUBLE GRAVES. THOUGHTS ON A PECULIAR
DOUBLE GRAVE FROM KARLSTRUP, DENMARK
Author(s): Walsh, Matthew - Reiter, Samantha - Kaul, Flemming - Frei, Karin (The National Museum of Denmark)
Presentation Format: Oral
Throughout history alternative gender identities and categories have been integral to social groups that are highly-performative
and/or rigorously hierarchical, as e.g. within martial fraternities. Here, we open up for an alternative interpretation of a same-sex
double grave from the Early Nordic Bronze Age from Denmark. We suggest the possibility that the so-called ‘warrior elite’, may
have embodied a distinctive and recognized gender category, based on individual mobility and dynamic fraternal relationships.
We suggest that male identities may have been more complex than may be hypothesized from a gender-normative notion of
masculinity. Double graves indicate a significance to the intimate relationship between the deceased as recognized by the living,
yet these relationships have always been assessed from a heteronormative perspective. We propose that the warrior lifestyle
may have included intimate interpersonal relationships between men as part of the shared warrior ideology and that such relationships would have been a recognized feature of the warrior elite. To investigate this hypothesis, we look at features of a
same-sex male double grave from Karlstrup, Denmark and compare it with other Nordic Bronze Age double burials. We develop
how this particular grave, while mimicking the standard schema for double graves of the period – i.e. those of ‘blood-brother’
warriors or husband-wife couples, etc, may reflect a social reality for both the deceased and the living that was quite different
from these prototype identities. For context, we draw insights with evidence from, among others, Classical and anthropological
literature. We offer a brief discussion of why gender-related interpretive frameworks are of value to our understandings of the
archaeological record, and provide another layer of information offering a deeper understanding of prehistoric societies and
individuals’ potential social mobility in the past.
