THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL TOURISM IN POLAND – THREATS AND OPPORTUNITIES (CASE STUDY)
Author(s): Byszewska, Agata (Narodowy Instytut Dziedzictwa / National Heritage Board Of Poland)
Presentation Format: Oral
The new tourism formula called 3 x E (Entertainment, Excitement, Education) applies also to cultural tourism, the main tourists
destination are monuments and museums, including archaeological sites. Activities aimed at raising awareness of heritage,
cause that archaeological attractions are increasingly visited by tourists. However, this trend has its advantages and disadvantages. The growing number of tourists motivates the managers of the monument to further actions, in accordance with the
principle the appetite grows with what it feeds on.The fact that more and more often archaeological sites are treated as places
to generate profits can cause irreversible damage to the site.
Archaeological sites are of interest to many groups. The perception of its the value and the way of management depends on the
point of view. For a researcher (not just archaeologists) the most important is obtaining as much scientific data as possible. For
museums the priority is to get as many visitors as possible. For an archaeological site manager (eg. local government) the most
important is an effective spatial development. The tourist expects information and entertainment. In such situation protection
of the archaeological heritage is very difficult. Different expectations and the lack of dialogue between the representatives of
particular groups contributes to conflict situations, when the archaeological heritage most often suffers losses. The priority
of archaeological heritage management should be primarily the preservation of authentic structures. The educational factor
cannot be overestimated for protection. I would like to present a few examples of archaeological sites, that attract hundreds of
thousands of visitors. I would like to analyze what impact the tourism has had on the state of preservation, landscape and cognitive values of those sites and whether the success of the museum was not too destructive to the archaeological site.
